 Well, first of all...  
 Chris, first of all, I was just saying to Chris Christie, they say we're outspoken, we need to take lessons from Donald Trump if we're really going to learn it. Here is the thing about Donald Trump. Donald Trump is hitting a nerve in this country. He is. He's hitting a nerve. People are frustrated. They're fed up. They don't think the government is working for them. And for people who want to just tune him out, they're making a mistake. 

Now, he's got his solutions. Some of us have other solutions. You know, look,
I balanced the federal budget as one of the chief architects when I was in
Washington. Hasn't been done since. I was a military reformer. I took the
state of Ohio from an $8 billion hole and a 350,000 job loss to a $2 billion
surplus and a gain of 350,000 jobs.


 But the point is that we all have solutions. Mr. Trump is touching a nerve because people want the wall to be built. They want to see an end to illegal immigration. They want to see it, and we all do. But we all have different ways of getting there. And you're going to hear from all of us tonight about what our ideas are. 


 OK. 


 Let's start off with my father being a mailman. So I understand the concerns of all the folks across this country, some of whom have trouble, you know, making ends meet. But I think she will come in a narrow way. The nominee of this party, if they're going to win, has got to come at it in a big way, which is pro-growth. Which is balancing budgets. You know, we were talking about it. People were saying, could we do it? I was the chairman of the Budget Committee and the lead architect the last time it happened in Washington, and when we did it we had great economic growth, we cut taxes, and we had a big surplus. 

Economic growth is the key. Economic growth is the key to everything. But once
you have economic growth, it is important that we reach out to people who live
in the shadows, the people who don't seem to ever think that they get a fair
deal. And that includes people in our minority community; that includes people
who feel as though they don't have a chance to move up.

You know, America is a miracle country. And we have to restore the sense that
the "Amiracle" will apply to you. Each and every one of the people in this
country who's watching tonight, lift everybody,  unite
everybody and build a stronger United States of America again. It will be and
can be done.


 Well, look, I'm an old-fashioned person here, and I happen to believe in traditional marriage. But I've also said the court has ruled -- 


 Wait, Megyn, the court has ruled, and I said we'll accept it. And guess what, I just went to a wedding of a friend of mine who happens to be gay. Because somebody doesn't think the way I do, doesn't mean that I can't care about them or can't love them. So if one of my daughters happened to be that, of course I would love them and I would accept them. Because you know what?  

That's what we're taught when we have strong faith. 

So the issues like that, issues like that are planted to divide us. I think
the simple fact of the matter is, and this is where I would agree with Jeb,
and I've been saying it all along, we need to give everybody a chance, treat
everybody with respect, and let them share in this great American dream that
we have, Megan. So, look, I'm going to love my daughters, I'm going to love
them no matter what they do. Because, you know what,  God
gives me unconditional love. I'm going to give it to my family and my friends
and the people around me.


 Well, Megyn, my father was a mailman. His father was a coal miner. My mother's mother could barely speak English. And their son today stands on this podium in the great state of Ohio not only as the governor, but a candidate for president of the United States.  

I do believe in miracles. You know, I've had a lot of elections. But my
elections are really not about campaigns. I tell my people that these are
about a movement. And a movement to do what? To restore common sense. A
movement to do things like provide economic growth. And a movement not to let
anybody be behind.

You know, today the country is divided. You asked a question about the police
and the difficulty in communities. We've got to unite our country again,
because we're stronger when we are united and we are weaker when we are
divided.

And we've got to listen to other people's voices, respect them, but keep in
mind, and I believe in terms of the things that I've read in my lifetime, the
Lord'is not picking us. But because of how we respect human rights, because
that we are a good force in the world, he wants America to be strong.

He wants America to succeed. And he wants America to lead. And nothing is more
important to me than my family, my faith, and my friends. [_cheering and
applause_]


 You know, tonight we hear about what people want to do. I want to tell you what I've done. I was a member of the Armed Services Committee for 18 years. I spent a big chunk of my life studying national security issues and our role in the world. 

No. 2. I was the chairman of the House Budget Committee and one of the chief
architects the last time we balanced a budget, and it was the first time we
had done it since man walked on the moon. We had a $5 trillion surplus and we
cut taxes.

I spent ten years in the private sector, actually learning how business works.
And now I'm the governor of Ohio, and I inherited a state that was on the
brink  of dying. And we turned it all around with jobs and
balanced budgets and rising credit and tax cuts, and the state is unified, and
people have hope again in Ohio. 


 Hello, I'm John Kasich, the Governor of Ohio. Emma, and Reese, my children, and Karen, love 'ya girls. Thanks for watching tonight. 

By the way, I think I actually flew on this plane with Ronald Reagan when I
was a congressman, and his goals, and mine, really much — are pretty much the
same. Lift Americans, unify, give hope, grow America, and restore it is to
that great, shining city on a hill.

Yes, he was a great one, and I learned much from watching him. The most
important thing, hope to Americans, unify, lift everyone in America.



 Jake, Jake. 


 Listen, you know, I — if I were sitting at home and watch thing back and forth, I would be inclined to turn it off. I mean, people at home want to know across this country, they want to know what we're going to do to fix this place, how we'll balance a budget, how we're going to create more economic growth, how we'll pay down the debt. What we're going to do to strengthen the military. 

So, we just spent 10 minutes here...


 But — but wait a minute. It's a lot of ad hogshead. Now, I know that it may be buzzing out there, but I think it's important we get to the issues, because that's what people want, and they don't want all this fighting. 


 ...Yeah, well... 


 Well, let me just say this. First of all, I think it's a bad agreement, I would never have done it. But, you know, a lot of our problems in the world today is that we don't have the relationship with our allies. If we want to go everywhere alone, we will not have the strength as (ph) if we could rebuild with our allies. 

Now, this agreement, we don't know what's going to happen in 18 months. I
served on the Defense Committee for 18 years. I've seen lots of issues in
foreign affairs, and foreign — in terms of global politics, you have to be
steady.

Now, here's the — if they cheat, we slap the sanctions back on. If they help
Hamas, and Hezbollah, we slap the sanctions back on. And, if we find out that
they may be developing a nuclear weapon, than the military option is on the
table. We are stronger when we work with the Western civilization, our friends
in Europe, and just doing it on our own I don't think is the right policy.


 No, no, no. I want to — I want to — I want to say something about what the senator just said. 


 No one is — no — let me — let me suggest to you we believe that we operate better in the world when our allies work with us. President Bush did it in the Gulf War. We work better when we are unified. 

Secondly, nobody's trusting Iran. They violate the deal, we put on the
sanctions, and we have the high moral ground to talk to our allies in Europe
to get them to go with us.

If they don't go with us, we slap the sanctions on anyway. If they fund these
radical groups that threaten Israel and all of the West, then we should rip up
the deal and put the sanctions back on.

And let me make it clear — let me make it clear...




 ... if we think — if we think they're getting close to a — to developing a nuclear weapon and we get that information, you better believe that I would do everything in my power as the commander-in-chief to stop them having a nuclear weapon. 


 We can have it, and we can have our allies, and we can be strong as a country, and we can project across this globe with unity, not just doing it alone. That is not what gets us where we want to get as a nation. 


 ...because I don't think it's going to work out. 


 We're not — what I can tell you is this. We didn't surrender in New Jersey, six years ago, as the brand new first ever pro-life governor of New Jersey since Roe versus Wade, I defended Planned Parenthood. 

And I've vetoed Planned Parenthood funding, now, eight times in New Jersey.
Since the day I walked in as governor, Planned Parenthood has not been funded
in New Jersey. We stood up and every one of those vetoes has been sustained.

But here's the problem, we're — we're fighting with each other up here. We
agree. Let's ask Hillary Clinton. She believes in the systematic murder of
children in the womb to preserve their body parts...


 ...Dana, in a way that maximizes their value for sale for profit. It is disgusting, and the American people need to hear it... 


 ...we shouldn't be fighting with each other. She's the real opponent, she's the real problem. 


 I'll tell you what — I'll tell you what I'd be willing to fight for. I'll tell you what I'd be willing to fight for. Why will (ph) we put tax reform on the president's desk, so we can simplify this tax system? 


 No, no, it's really important, Dana. We got to talk about what we would be willing to shut down for. Why don't we put tax reform on this president's desk, and make him veto it if that's what he wants to do? Why haven't we repealed and replaced Obamacare? 

Make him veto if that's what he wants to do.


 There's a — 


 Jake — 


 OK, Jake. 


 I don't at this point in terms of changing the incentives for investment and risk-taking. 

But let's just stop for a second. There's one person on this stage that does
have a record. I'm the only person on the stage and one of the few people in
this country that led the effort as the chief architect of the last time we
balanced the federal budget.

We also cut taxes. And when I left Washington in 2000, we had a $5 trillion
surplus, and the economy was booming. I had spent 10 years of my life to get
us to that point, went out in the private sector, was a great experience, and
went into Ohio and took an $8 billion hole and turned it into a $2 billion
surplus.

We've had the largest amount of tax cuts of any sitting governor. We've grown
well over 300,000 jobs. You see, I've done it in both places. I'm the only one
here that has done it in both places.

It took a lot to get us to a balanced budget. It was legitimate. It was real.
And we negotiated it. A lot of what we're talking about here tonight as we
take this position and that position, you know what? At the end of the day,
America has got to work.

We've got to figure out how we come together to deal with this — with our
fiscal problems because when we deal with that, we create a stronger economy
for everybody. People have a chance to rise.

So, you know, when we think about how we make a choice, it's the person that
lands that plane. It's not somebody that talks about it. It's about the person
who has done it. And I've done it in...


 ... both places. And I did it including people in the other party. And that's how we were successful. 


 And that's how I will be president, using that experience to drive this country forward. Thank you.  


 Well, look, people still have to get to know me, so I want to spend my time talking about my experience reforming welfare, balancing budgets, cutting taxes, providing economic growth when I was in Washington, turning Ohio around. Eight billion in the hole, $2 billion surplus, up over 300,000 jobs, big tax cuts, strengthening our credit. 

All those things matter but, you know, as a young man in my first election in
1978, I defeated an incumbent Democrat. I defeated an incumbent Democrat in
1982; running on the Reagan program, I was the only Republican in America to
defeat an incumbent Democrat that year.

And then, when I won for election of governor, I was the first Republican to
defeat an incumbent in 36 years, and the first person to have never run
statewide out of politics for 10 years to beat an incumbent. That hadn't
happened for 96 years.

So, we'll get to the point where we'll talk about Hillary Clinton, or whoever
the nominee is, record. But right now, I want to give people sense of hope,
sense of purpose, a sense of unity, sense that we can do it. So...


 You know, at the end of the day, I'm going to continue to talk about my record, because there is, did you ever notice when people run for office, they run for president, they make a lot of promises, they don't keep them. 


 I don't intend to do that, and I going to be out there pushing it out — don't worry about me and Hillary. That will all work out, and I'm from Ohio. She will not beat me there, I can promise you that.  


 Can I just — can I — Jake, can I just make one point on this whole military discussion? 


 I called for boots on the ground many months ago in a coalition with our friends who share our interest. You know, you win a battle with the military, and when we go somewhere, we need to be mobile, and lethal. We need to take care of business, and we need to come home. 

But, we face, also, a bigger war — and you win the bigger war with the battle
of ideas. You wonder why young people, and educated people, rich people,
schooled people, have tried to join ISIS.

Western civilization, all of us, need to wake up to the fact that those
murderers and rapists need to be called out, and in Western civilization we
need to make it clear that our faith in the Jewish and Christian principals
force us to live a life bigger than ourselves...


 ...to make (ph) centers (ph) of justice so that we can battle the radicals, call them out for what they are, and make sure that all of our people feel fulfilled in living in Western civilization... 


 ...This is a giant battle in the world today... 


 Well, it's probably not, maybe, legal, but, I would pick Mother Theresa, the lady that I had a chance to meet, a woman who lived a life so much bigger than her own. An inspiration to everyone when we think about our responsibility to love our neighbor as we love ourselves. 


 Well, I have one now — they (ph) call me, "Unit One". 

My wife says, "You'll never be Unite One, I'm Unite One. You're Unit Two."


 Well, as president, I will make this a nation that will solve problems. And how? By having the elected officials and the leaders realize they're Americans before they're Republicans or Democrats. I did it in Washington. And I've done it in Ohio by having the elected officials realize that they're Ohioans before anything else. 

Secondly, I will rebuild the relationships and show the respect to our allies
around the world. We have no choice but to do that. We will be stronger when
we are unified. And we'll fight for freedom and for human rights.

And finally, a little bit of what Carly said. The people that are out there
listening, America was never great because we ran America from the top down.
America is great because we have run America from the bottom up, where we all
live in the neighborhoods.

One more time in America, we need to revive the concept of citizenship, where
everybody's actions make a huge difference in changing the world. We have a
Holocaust memorial on our state house grounds. And there is one line on there
that stands out all the time. "If you've saved one life, you've changed the
world."

We need to adopt that as citizens and rebuild and reinspire our country. Thank
you. 


 Good question, but I want to tell you, my great concern is that we are on the verge, perhaps, of picking someone who cannot do this job.

I've watched to see people say that we should dismantle Medicare and Medicaid
and leave the senior citizens out — out in the — in the cold. I've heard them
talk about deporting 10 or 11 — people here from this country out of this
country, splitting families. I've heard about tax schemes that don't add up,
that put our kids in — in a deeper hole than they are today.

We need somebody who can lead. We need somebody who can balance budgets, cut
taxes...


 You know, frankly, I did it in Washington, in Ohio, and I will do it again in Washington, if I'm president, to get this country moving again.


 country moving again.


 Listen, I want to just comment.


 Well I want to comment on this. This is the fantasy...


 This is the fantasy that I talked about in the beginning.


 I'm the only person on this stage that actually was involved in the chief architect of balancing the Federal Budget.

You can't do it with empty promised. You know, these plans would put us
trillions and trillions of dollars in debt.

I actually have a plan. I'm the only one on this stage that has a plan that
would create jobs, cut taxes, balance the budget and can get it done because
I'm realistic. You just don't make promises like this.

Why don't we just give a chicken in every pot, while we're, you know, coming
up — coming up with these fantasy tax schemes. We'll just clean it up. Where
are you gonna clean it up?

You have to deal with entitlements, you have to be in a position to control
discretionary spending. You gotta be creative and imaginative.

Now, let me just be clear, John. I went into Ohio where we had an $8 billion
hole and now we have a $2 billion surplus. We're up 347,000 jobs.

When I was in Washington, I fought to get the budget balanced. I was the
architect. It was the first time we did it since man walked on the moon. We
cut taxes and we had a $5 trillion projected surplus when I left.

That's was hard work. Fiscal discipline, know what you're doing. Creativity.

This stuff is fantasy. Just like getting rid of Medicare and Medicaid. Come
on, that's just not — you scare senior citizens with that. It's not
responsible.


 Well, I mean right here. To talk about we're just gonna have a 10 percent tithe and that's how we're gonna fund the government? And we're going to just fix everything with waste, fraud, and abuse? Or that we're just going to be great? Or we're going to ship 10 million Americans — or 10 million people out of this country, leaving their children here in this country and dividing families?

Folks, we've got to wake up. We cannot elect somebody that doesn't know how to
do the job. You have got to pick somebody who has experience, somebody that
has the know-how, the discipline.

And I spent my entire lifetime balancing federal budgets, growing jobs, the
same in Ohio. And I will go back to Washington with my plan.


 And I will have done it within 100 days, and it will pass. And we will be strong again. Thank you.


 Let me just — let me respond. First of all, Ohio does have an energy industry, but we're diversified. We're one of the fastest growing states in the country. We came back from the dead. And you know what? It works very, very well.

And secondly, when you talk about me being on the board of Lehman Brothers, I
wasn't on the board of Lehman Brothers. I was a banker and I was proud of it.
And I traveled the country and learned how people made jobs.

We ought to have politicians who not only have government experience but know
how the CEOs and the job creators work. My state is doing great across the
board. And guess what, in 2011, I got a deal...


 ... an agreement with the...




 ... that he tried to take credit for four years later. It's a joke.


 John Harwood, there's a bigger issue here.


 Well, first of all, when we talk about the Import Export Bank, it's time to clean up corporate welfare. If we're gonna reform welfare for poor people, we ought to reform it for rich people, as well. Secondly, in our state, we went from a loss of 350,000 jobs to, now, a gain of 347,000 jobs to the positive. Our wages are growing faster than the national average, and I've cut taxes more than any sitting governor in this state — $5 billion, including no taxes on small business and killing the death tax.

I want to go back to what we were talking about earlier, this budget deal in
Washington.

This is the same old stuff since I left.

You spend the money today and then you hope you're going to save money
tomorrow.

I don't know if people understand, but I spent a lifetime with my colleagues
getting us to a federal balanced budget. We actually did it. And I have a road
map and a plan right now to get us to balance.

Reforming entitlements, cutting taxes. You see, because if you really want to
get to a balanced budget, you need to reduce your expenses and you need to
grow your economy. So what I will tell you about our incentives — our
incentives are tight, and at the end of the day we make sure that we gain more
from the creation of jobs than what we lose.

And you know what? Ohio, one of the best growing places in the country — I not
only did it in Washington, I did it in Ohio, and I'll go back to Washington,
and there will be no more silly deals...


 ... If I become President because we'll have a Constitutional Amendment to require a federally balanced budget so they will do their job.


 Well, first of all, we're running a $2 billion dollar surplus, we're not having a revenue problem right now. And, sending mixed signals to kids about drugs is a disaster. Drugs is one of the greatest scourge in this country, and I spent five years of my administration working with my team to do a whole sort of things to try to reign in the problem of overdoses, and it goes on and on. We could do a whole show on that.

I want to go back for a second thought on this issue of income inequality. My
program would move the 104 programs of the federal Department of Education
into four block grants, and send them back to the states because income
inequality is driven by a lack of skills when kids don't get what they need to
be able to compete and win in this country.

The fact is, in order to get this economy moving again, I call for freezing
regulations for a year except for the problem of public safety. I believe that
we need to cut these taxes down, we need to be on a roadmap to balancing the
budget, and we need to send power, money, and influence, the welfare
department, the education department, job training, infrastructure, Medicaid,
all of that out of Washington back to the states so we can run these programs
from where we live to the top, not a one size fits all mentality that they
have in Washington.

And, that will get to the nub of opportunity for our children, and an ability
to see wages rise. Again...




 ...One more time, in Ohio, our wages are growing faster than the national average. We've cut taxes, balanced budgets, changed the regulatory environment. Folks, you want to —


 — fix America, this is the formula. It worked for Reagan and it works for our team in Ohio. Thank you.


Well, first of all, in Ohio we're changing the whole system. Universities will not get paid one dime unless the student graduates or — graduates or completes a course.

Secondly, you can be in high school and complete almost an entire first year
before you go to college and get credit to do that. And, of course, in
addition to that, we are working now to go after the cost drivers in our
universities. And let me give you an example. Universities today have so many
non-academic assets. At Ohio State they sold the parking garage and the
parking lot, and they got $500 million because they shouldn't be in the
parking lot business. They shouldn't be in the ding business, they shouldn't
be in the dorm business.

And, of course, we need to take advantage of on-line education to reduce these
costs and begin to dis-intermediate the cost of four years.

Now, for those who that have these big high costs, I think we can seriously
look at an idea of where you can do public service. I mean legitimate, public
service and begin to pay off some of that debt through the public service that
you do. And in the meantime, it may inspire us to care more about our country,
more about ourselves.

This is a big moral issue in America. Living a life bigger than yourself, and
being a center of healing and justice. And people can learn it through public
service.


 John.


 I wanna tell you, in my state, we took Medicaid, the hardest program to control, and we took it from a 10 percent growth rate to 2.5 percent without taking one person off the rolls or cutting one single benefit.

And so much of what we did — to force competition, to use technology, to stand
down the special interest groups — can you imagine taking Medicaid from 10 to
2.5 percent?

We can take many of those same procedures, we can apply it to Medicare. We can
make a stronger program. But I agree with Jeb, you can't just do this by
growing the economy. You can't grow your way out of demographics.

But we can give people better health care. And finally, on health care, why
don't we start treating — keep giving...


 ...incentives for people to keep people healthy, rather than giving the incentives to treat them when they're sick?


 I was on morning Joe at a town hall and a young student stood up and said, "Can I still be idealistic?"

I said, absolutely, you can still change the world. And, you know the old
inscription, if you save one life, you've changed the world. Folks, we have a
problem here with the leadership in Washington, but I'll tell you another
problem. We need to rebuild our families. We need to have stronger families.
We need to know who our neighbors are. We need to come together as a country
because we have to realize that America is great, not from the top-down. Oh
yeah, we want to elect a good president, but America is great from the bottom-
up, and the bottom-up is us in our families, in our communities, in our
neighborhoods. We will renew America if we work together, and I am totally
confident that we will. And God bless America. 


 First of all, let me just say that, in the state of Ohio — and I'm the only acting executive on — on this stage today — we do have a moderate increase in the minimum wage. And I got to tell you, my father carried mail on his back. His father was a coal miner. He died of black lung. He was losing his eyesight. My mother's mother lived with us. She could barely speak English. I come from a town where if the wind blew the wrong way, people found themselves out of work. An economic theory is fine, but you know what? People need help.

Now, I have a plan that, in fact, would cut taxes, but not $11 trillion or $12
trillion that would put my children further in debt. I have a plan that would
not only cut taxes, lower the income tax rate for individuals, lower the tax
for businesses so businesses will compete here and not move operations
overseas, and also a plan — the only plan of anybody standing on this stage to
get us to a balanced budget by the end of a second term.

And, you know, the simple fact of the matter is, we hear a lot of promises in
this debate, a lot of promises about these tax cuts or tax schemes sometimes
that I call them. Hillary and the Democrats promise everything on the spending
side. We've got to be responsible about what we propose on the tax side.

Yes, lower taxes, lower spending. My website, JohnKasich.com, will show you
exactly how we balance the budget. I balanced the budget in Washington as a
chief architect, and I have balanced it in Ohio for one reason. When you
balance the budget and you cut taxes, people get work.

And our most important moral purpose as leaders in the political system is to
make sure we create an environment for job creation so people can live their
dreams and realize their God-given potential. That's why it's so important.

And for those at the bottom, we've got to do what we can to train them so they
can move up. But to just look the other way is not acceptable, because, you
know what, as the governor of Ohio I have to deal with real challenges, and
we've gotten it done in our state, and I will do it for America. 


 Sure. We would move the Medicare system from a 7 percent growth down to about a 5 percent growth. And I have a whole series of ways to do that. In Ohio, we reduced Medicaid funding for the poor from 10 percent to 2.5 percent, didn't cut one benefit or didn't take anybody off the rolls. Why? Because we're innovators. I've been an innovator my entire career. And I really don't care what special interests or lobbyists have to say. I have a job to do when I take over a public office. Now, we freeze non-defense discretionary for eight years. We also put an increase in defense spending. Our tax cuts balance out. And at the end of the day, we will get to a balanced budget.

And I want everybody here to know, when I was Budget Committee chairman in
Washington, I stepped on every toe in that town, and we got to a balanced
budget, and we had enormous job growth. And as governor of Ohio, we went from
350,000 lost jobs to a gain of 347,000 jobs.


 I'll do it in Washington. I've done it twice; I'll do it thrice for the United States of America.


 Excuse me.


 Yeah, I would like to make a comment.


 I appreciate it, Jeb. I'm all of you. But I want at some point to talk about a value-added tax and $11 trillion, $12 trillion tax cuts that will put our kids way deeper in the hole than they have been at this point. So I would like to talk about it at some point, because that's what leadership is.


 Maria, can we comment on that?


 Can we comment on that?


 Well, look, in 1986 Ronald Reagan basically said the people who were here, if they were law-abiding, could stay. But, what didn't happen is we didn't build the walls effectively and we didn't control the border. We need to. We need to control our border just like people have to control who goes in and out of their house.

But if people think that we are going to ship 11 million people who are law-
abiding, who are in this country, and somehow pick them up at their house and
ship them out of Mexico — to Mexico, think about the families. Think about the
children.

So, you know what the answer really is? If they have been law- abiding, they
pay a penalty. They get to stay. We protect the wall. Anybody else comes over,
they go back.

But for the 11 million people, come on, folks. We all know you can't pick them
up and ship them across, back across the border. It's a silly argument. It is
not an adult argument. It makes no sense. 


 Jerry, Gerald, it was an attack.




 In the state of Ohio, the state of Ohio, we have grown 347,000 jobs. Our unemployment is half of what it was. Our fracking industry, energy industry may have contributed 20,000, but if Mr. Trump understood that the real jobs come in the downstream, not in the upstream, but in the downstream. And that's where we're going to get our jobs.

But Ohio is diversified. And little false little things, sir, they don't
really work when it comes to the truth. So the fact is, all I'm suggesting, we
can't ship 11 million people out of this country. Children would be terrified,
and it will not work.




 ...Mr. Baker, everybody got to talk about taxes...


 ...I think you were coming to me and then...


 ...Look, I hate to crash the party to you, Mr. Baker, but, you know, what's fair...


 ...Yes, sir...


 Let me tell you this, Mr. Baker, in terms of the cyber attacks, we have the capability to not only have a defensive posture, but it also to make it clear to people that if you attack us with cyber attacks, we will destroy the mechanisms that you are using to attack us.

I want to give you a little trip around the world. I served on the Defense
Committee for 18 years. In the Ukraine, arm the people there so they can fight
for themselves. In the eastern part of Europe, make sure that Finland and the
Baltics know that if the Russians move, we move.

In Syria, yes, a no-fly zone in the north on the Turkish border, a no-fly zone
on the south on the Jordanian border. Anybody flies in the first time, maybe
they can fly out. They fly in there a second time, they will not fly out.

And it also becomes a sanctuary for the people to be. And it also sends many
messages in the Middle East that we're still involved.

Saudi Arabia, cut off the funding for the radical clerics, the ones that
preach against us. But they're fundamentally our friends. Jordan, we want the
king to reign for 1,000 years. Egypt, they have been our ally and a moderating
force in the Middle East throughout their history.

In the groups — in the countries of the Gulf states of Bahrain, the Cleveland
Clinic is opening an operation. Clearly we see the same with them. And in
Israel, we have no better ally in the world, and no more criticizing them in
public, we should support them.

And finally China, China doesn't own the South China Sea, and I give the
president some credit for being able to move a naval force in there to let the
Chinese know that we're not going to put up with it any more.

And in the trade agreement, the TPP, it's critical to us, not only for
economic reasons and for jobs, because there are so many people who are
connected to getting jobs because of trade, but it allows us to create not
only economy alliances, but also potentially strategic alliances against the
Chinese. They are not our enemy, but they are certainly not our friend.

And finally, I will say to everyone in this room, we have been talking about
taxes and economics. When the fall comes, and we run against Hillary, which
will be a disaster if she got elected. I have two 16-year-old girls, and I
want this country to be strong.

We make promises we can't keep under the bright light of the fall, we will
have trouble. We must make sure that economic programs and our military
programs are solid. I served in Washington as the chairman of the Budget
Committee, and we got the budget balanced.

And in Ohio, as the CEO, and guess what, we have got to have a CEO mentality
and a way to beat Hillary Clinton and the Democracies in the fall. And our
ideas have to add up. They have to be solid. And people have to know we have
the confidence to lead America.

And as president, I will lead this country, as I have before in Washington and
in Ohio, and will return both on domestic and international affairs. And I
appreciate the opportunity to speak this time, Gerry. 


 Let me — let me also say, Gary — Gary, let me also say, Jeb is — what Jeb is talking about with the big banks is to force them to reserve their capital, people who invest it and they hold their capital, so that if the bank goes down, the people who are invested in the bank are the ones that pay. That's what he's trying to say.

Secondly, I'll tell you about Wall Street: There's too much greed. And the
fact is, a free enterprise system is a system that's produced the greatest
wealth for the world. But you know Michael Novak, the great Catholic
theologian, says that a free enterprise system that is not underlaid with
values — and we should all think about the way we conduct our lives — yes,
free enterprise is great, profits are great, but there have to be some values
that underlay it, and they need a good ethics lesson on Wall Street on a
regular basis to keep them in check so we, the people, do not lose.


 Neil, that's the difference of being an executive. And let me just explain: when a bank is ready to go under and depositors are getting ready to lose their life savings, you just don't say we believe in philosophical concerns. You know what an executive has to decide? When there's a water crisis, how do we get water to the city? When there's a school shooting, how do you get there and help heal a community? When there are financial crisis, or a crisis with ebola, you got to go there and try to fix it.

Philosophy doesn't work when you run something. And I gotta tell you, on-the-
job training for president of the United States doesn't work. We've done it
for 8 years, — and almost 8 years now. It does not work. 

We need an executive who's been tried, has been tested, and judge the
decisions that that executive makes. I don't like what the Fed is doing, but
I'll tell you what worries me more than anything else: turning the Fed over to
the Congress of the United States...


 ...so they can print the money. That would be a very bad approach.


 I wouldn't. I wouldn't.


 No. No, I didn't say that.


 They were — they were talking about what you would do with depositors. Would you let these banks shut down?

My argument is, going forward, the banks have to reserve the capital, so that
the — so that the people who own the capital start pressuring the banks to not
take these risky approaches, Ted.

But at the end of the day...


 ... I'm gonna tell you this. Let me tell you this. If during — if during...


 ...because if during — well, I'll tell you what (ph). 
 As an executive — no. As an executive, I would figure out how to separate those people who can afford it versus those people, or the hard-working folks who put those money in those institutions...... let me — no, no. Let me say another thing. Here's what I mean by that. Here's what I mean by that.


 When you are faced — when you are faced, in the last financial crisis, with banks going under — with banks going under, and people, people who put their — their life savings in there, you got to deal with it. You can't turn a blind eye to it.

Now, going forward, that's one thing. If you had another financial crisis,
perhaps there would be an effort to make sure that we do (ph).


 Well, ladies and gentlemen, if Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders were to win this election, my 16-year-olds, I — I worry about what their life is going to be like.

You know, the conservative movement is all about opportunity. It is about
lower taxes. It's about balanced budgets. It's about less regulation. And it's
about sending power, money and influence back to where we live so we can run
America from the bottom up.

In addition to that, once we have the power and the money and the influence
with programs we shift out, that each of us have a responsibility to reach out
and to rebuild our families, make them stronger, and connect our
neighborhoods. All that together — wealth, connection, family — America's
greatest days are ahead. We must win this election. 


 Thank you, Wolf. Just last weekend, just last week, a friend asked one of my daughters, "Do you like politics?" And my daughter said, "No, I don't. And the reason I don't like it is because there's too much fighting, too much yelling. It's so loud, I don't like it." You know, I turned to my friend and I said, "You know, she's really on to something."

And when we think about our country and the big issues that we face in this
country; creating jobs, making sure people can keep their jobs, the need for
rising wages, whether our children when they graduate from college can find a
job, protecting the homeland, destroying ISIS, rebuilding defense. These are
all the things that we need to focus on but we'll never get there if we're
divided. We'll never get there if republicans and democrats just fight with
one another.

Frankly, we are republicans and they're democrats but before all of that,
we're Americans. And I believe we need to unify in so many ways to rebuild our
country, to strengthen our country, to rebuild our defense, and for America to
secure it's place it world; for us, for our children, and for the next
generation.

Thank you. 


 Well, first of all, Wolf, I said last February that we needed to have people on the ground, troops on the ground in a coalition similar to what we had in the first Gulf War.

I remember when the Egyptian ambassador to the United States stood in the Rose
Garden and pledged Arab commitment to removing Saddam Hussein from Kuwait.
Before we came out here tonight, I am told that the Saudis have organized 34
countries who want to join in the battle against terrorism.

First and foremost, we need to go and destroy ISIS. And we need to do this
with our Arab friends and our friends in Europe.

And when I see they have a climate conference over in Paris, they should have
been talking about destroying ISIS because they are involved in virtually
every country, you know, across this world. 

Now, you destroy ISIS in a coalition. You get joint intelligence with our
European friends. And then here at home, there are things called the Joint
Terrorism Task Force, headed by the FBI, and made up of local law enforcement,
including state police.

They need the tools. And the tools involve encryption where we cannot hear
what they're even planning. And when we see red flags, a father, a mother, a
neighbor who says we have got a problem here, then we have to give law
enforcement the ability to listen so they can disrupt these terrorist attacks
before they occur.

We can do this, but we've got to get moving. Pay me now or pay me a lot more
later. This is the direction we need to go. 


 No, I don't think it is. And I want to go back to two other issues. One is the metadata. We know we have to hold this data for a longer period of time. And, you know, in a lot of ways, Chris is right. Look, what a president has to do is take a position. We don't want to err on the side of having less. We want to err on the side of having more. That's good for our families.

In addition to that, Wolf, there is a big problem. It's called encryption. And
the people in San Bernardino were communicating with people who the FBI had
been watching. But because their phone was encrypted, because the intelligence
officials could not see who they were talking to, it was lost.

We have to solve the encryption problem. It is not easy. A president of the
United States, again, has to bring people together, have a position. We need
to be able to penetrate these people when they are involved in these plots and
these plans. And we have to give the local authorities the ability to
penetrate to disrupt. That's what we need to do. Encryption is a major
problem, and Congress has got to deal with this and so does the president to
keep us safe. 


 Yeah, let me — let me just suggest to everybody, and I hear — last February, I said we needed to have people on the ground in a coalition with Europe and our allies. This is not going to get done just by working with the Sunnis. And it is not going to get done if we just embed a few people.

We have to go massively, like we did in the first Gulf War where we destroyed
Saddam's ability to take Kuwait. We need to have a coalition that will stand
for nothing less than the total destruction of ISIS and we have to be the
leader. We can't wait for anybody else. I served on the Armed Services
Committee for 18 years and we must lead, or the job won't get done,
unfortunately, for our country 


 I don't understand this thing about Assad. He has to go. Assad is aligned with Iran and Russia. The one thing we want to prevent is we want to prevent Iran being able to extend a Shia crescent all across the Middle East. Assad has got to go.

And there are moderates there. There are moderates in Syria who we should be
supporting. I do not support a civil war. I don't want to be policeman of the
world. But we can't back off of this. And let me tell you, at the end, the
Saudis have agreed to put together a coalition inside of Syria to stabilize
that country.


 He must go. It will be a blow to Iran and Russia.


 The foreign policy, you have to know how to pick and choose. There's no way, if Saddam had not had weapons of mass destruction, I would have gone, because I don't believe that the U.S. should be involved directly in civil wars.

I opposed the U.S. involvement in Lebanon. We ended up having to withdraw our
marines after our barracks were blown up.

There is a difference between Iraq, where you have Sunni, Shia, and Kurds put
together after the First World War by the Western powers. It doesn't work. It
needs to break up into three parts.

And for the Russians, frankly, it's time that we punched the Russians in the
nose. They've gotten away with too much in this world and we need to stand up
against them, not just there, but also in Eastern Europe where they threaten
some of our most precious allies.


 It sounds more and more what my daughter said that I said in the beginning, all the fighting and arguing is not advancing us.


 It is not the way we're going to strengthen our country. We will strengthen our country when we come together. 

And, look, you've got Rand Paul, you've got Ted Cruz, you've got Marco, you've
got a lot of people on this stage that have studied these issues. You know
what a leader does? A leader has a sound program, has a good policy, and then
brings people together to solve problems. 

Guess what? Both in Congress in balancing the budget and in Ohio fixing the
economy — and, by the way, we talk about the fence. The first thing we better
get going is strengthening our economy, because if we don't have a strong
economy, we can't pay for all of this. And the world wants us to be able to
function from strength, believe it or not. Get our economy going, get these
people together in a room. We can fix this, ladies and gentlemen.
 We don't have to fight all the time. It can be done, and we will
be great...


 ... when we join together. Thank you, Hugh.


 You know, obviously, as president of the United States, we've got to keep the people safe. That's first and foremost.

But as governor of Ohio, I have an obligation to keep the 11.5 million people
in Ohio safe. And we have been very effective with our Joint Terrorism Task
Force, being able to make busts.

In fact, we just made one three-four weeks ago against a person who was
favorable to ISIS living in Akron.

But let me tell you what is interesting about the administration. We had
Central American miners that were placed in Ohio, and we never knew a thing
about it. We didn't know where they were. And, in fact, we know now that some
of them, there is a case going on where some of them may have been human-
trafficked.

So when the administration tells me we have a great vetting process, the proof
is in the pudding. They sent these miners to us. Our schools were disrupted.
We didn't know where they were. And bad things happened to them. And now they
tell me that we ought to be able to admit these Syrian refugees.

So, Wolf, look, people have accused me at times of having too big of a heart.
You know, that's OK. But I have to also to say I must keep the people of my
state safe. So we take a pause.


 No Republican has ever been elected president of the United States without winning Ohio. Let me give you a little tip on how you win Ohio, it's reform, it's hope, it's growth, it's opportunity, and it's security.

The people of Ohio are the people of America. The people of America are
reflected in Ohio. Our message has to be big, and bold, and positive, and
connect, not just with people's heads but also connect with their hearts.

If we do it, we will beat Hillary Clinton, and we will run the White House,
and we will strengthen and fix America, I promise you. 


 Look, it takes three things basically to grow jobs. And I've done it when I was in Washington when we had a balanced budget; had four years of balanced budgets; paid down a half-trillion of debt. And our economy was growing like crazy. It's the same thing that I did in Ohio. It's a simple formula: common sense regulations, which is why I think we should freeze all federal regulations for one year, except for health and safety. It requires tax cuts, because that sends a message to the job creators that things are headed the right way. And if you tax cuts — if you cut taxes for corporations, and you cut taxes for individuals, you're going to make things move, particularly the corporate tax, which is the highest, of course, in the — in the world.

But in addition to that, we have to have fiscal discipline. We have to show
that we can march to a balanced budget. And when you do that, when you're in a
position of managing regulations; when you reduce taxes; and when you have
fiscal discipline, you see the job creators begin to get very comfortable with
the fact that they can invest.

Right now, you don't have the — you have taxes that are too high. You have
regulations — I mean, come on, they're affecting everybody here, particularly
our small businesses. They are — they're in a position where they're
smothering people. And I mean, are you kidding me? We're nowhere close to a
balanced budget or fiscal discipline.

Those three things put together are going to give confidence to job creators
and you will begin to see wages rise. You will begin to see jobs created in a
robust economy. And how do I know it? Because I've done it. I did it as the
chairman of the Budget Committee, working with Senator Domenici. And I've done
it in the state of Ohio as the chief executive.

Our wages are growing faster than the national average. We're running
surpluses. And we can take that message and that formula to Washington to lift
every single American to a better life. 


 Well, if that's the case, we're going to win every state, if Bernie Sanders is the nominee. That's not even an issue. But look......and I know Bernie, and I can promise you he's not going to be president of the United States. So here's this — the situation, I think, Maria.

And this is what we have to — I — I've got to tell you, when wages don't rise
— and they haven't for a lot of families for a number of years — it's very,
very difficult for them.

Part of the reason why it hasn't risen because sometimes we're not giving
people the skills they need. Sometimes it's because the Federal Reserve kept
interest rates so low that the wealthy were able to invest in — in strong
assets like the stock market when everybody else was left behind.

People are upset about it. I'll tell you what else they're upset about: you're
50 or 51 years old, and some kid walks in and tells you you're out of work,
and you don't know where to go and where to turn. Do we have answer for that?
We do. There are ways to retrain the 50 and 51-year-olds, because they've got
great value.

I'll tell you what else people are concerned about. Their kids come out of
college, they have high debt and they can't get a good job. We got to do a lot
about the high cost of high — higher education, but we've got to make sure
we're training people for jobs that exist, that are good jobs that can pay.


Let me tell you that, in this country — in this country, people are concerned
about their economic future. They're very concerned about it. And they wonder
whether somebody is getting something to — keeping them from getting it.

That's not the America that I've ever known. My father used to say, "Johnny,
we never — we don't hate the rich. We just want to be the rich." And we just
got to make sure that every American has the tools, in K-through-12 and in
vocational education, in higher education.

And we got to fight like crazy so people can think the American dream still
exists, because it does, with rising wages, with full employment and with
everybody in America — and I mean everybody in America — having an opportunity
to realize the American dream of having a better life than their mother and
their father.

I'm president — look, I've done it once. I've done it once in Washington, with
great jobs and lower taxes. The economy was really booming.

And now in Ohio, with the same formula, wages higher than the — than the
national average. A growth of 385,000 jobs.



It's not that hard. Just know where you want to go, stick to your guts. Get it
done, because our — our children and grandchildren are counting on us to get
it done. And, folks, we will. You count on it.


 Well, let me — let me first of all talk a little bit about my experience. I served on the Defense Committee for 18 years, and by the way, one of the members of that committee was Senator Strom Thurmond from South Carolina. Let em also tell you......that after the 9/11 attacks, Secretary Rumsfeld invited me to the Pentagon with a meeting of the former secretaries of Defense. And in that meeting, I suggested we had a problem with technology, and that I wanted to take people from Silicon Valley into the Pentagon to solve our most significant problems. So I not only had the opportunity to go through the Cold War struggles in Central America, and even after 9/11 to be involved. 

With Saudi Arabia and oil production, first of all, it's so critical for us to
be energy independent, and we're getting there because of fracking and we
ought to explore because, see, energy independence gives us leverage and
flexibility, and secondly, if you want to bring jobs back to the United States
of America in industry, low prices make the difference.

We're seeing it in my state and we'll see it in this country. And that's why
we must make sure we continue to frack.

In terms of Saudi Arabia, look, my biggest problem with them is they're
funding radical clerics through their madrasses. That is a bad deal and an
evil situation, and presidents have looked the other way. And I was going to
tell you, whether I'm president or not, we better make it clear to the Saudis
that we're going to support you, we're in relation with you just like we were
in the first Gulf War, but you've got to knock off the funding and teaching of
radical clerics who are the very people who try to destroy us and will turn
around and destroy them. 

So look, in foreign policy — in foreign policy, it's strength, but you've got
to be cool. You've got to have a clear vision of where you want to go. And I'm
going to tell you, that it — I'm going to suggest to you here tonight, that
you can't do on the job training.

I've seen so much of it – a Soviet Union, the coming down of a wall, the
issues that we saw around the world in Central America, the potential spread
of communism, and 9/11 and Gulf War. You see what the Saudi's — deliver them a
strong message but at the end of the day we have to keep our cool because most
of the time they're going right with us. And they must be part of our
coalition to destroy ISIS and I believe we can get that done.

Thank you.


 I — I've been for pausing on admitting the Syrian refugees. And the reasons why I've done is I don't believe we have a good process of being able to vet them. But you know, we don't want to put everybody in the same category. 

And I'll go back to something that had been mentioned just a few minutes ago.
If we're going to have a coalition, we're going to have to have a coalition
not just of people in the western part of the world, our European allies, but
we need the Saudis, we need the Egyptians, we need the Jordanians, we need the
Gulf states. We need Jordan.

We need all of them to be part of exactly what the first George Bush put
together in the first Gulf War.



It was a coalition made up of Arabs and Americans and westerners and we're
going to need it again. And if we try to put everybody in the same — call
everybody the same thing, we can't do it. And that's just not acceptable.

But I think a pause on Syrian refugees has been exactly right for all the
governors that have called for it, and also, of course, for me as the governor
of Ohio.


 Neil, Neil — can I say one thing about this. I'm a free trader. I support NAFTA. I believe in the PTT because it's important those countries in Asia are interfacing against China. And we do need China — Donald's right about North Korea.

I mean the fact is, is that they need to put the pressure on and frankly we
need to intercepts ships coming out of North Korea so they don't proliferate
all these dangerous materials. But what he's touching — talking about, I think
has got merit. And I'll allow putting that tariff or whatever he's saying
here...


 For too long — no, for too long, what happens is somebody dumps their product in our country and take our people's jobs, and then we go to an international court and it takes them like a year or two to figure out whether they were cheating us. And guess what? The worker's out of a job.

So when they — be found against that country that's selling products in here
lower than the cost of what it takes to produce them, then what do we tell the
worker? Oh, well, you know, it just didn't work out for you.

I think we should be for free trade but I think fair trade. And when countries
violate trade agreements or dump product in this country, we need — we need to
stand up against those countries that do that without making them into an
enemy.

And I want to just suggest to you. How do I know this? Because so many people
in my family worked in steel mills, and they didn't work with a white collar,
they worked in a blue collar. And the fact is those jobs are critical, they're
hard working members of the middle class and they need to be paid attention to
because they're Americans and they carry the load. So let's demand open trade
but fair trade in this country. That's what I think we need to do.



 Well, I created a task force well over a year ago and the purpose was to bring law enforcement, community people, clergy and the person that I named as one of the co-chair was a lady by the name of Nina Turner, a former State Senator, a liberal Democrat. She actually ran against one of my friends and our head of public safety. 

And they say down as a group trying to make sure that we can begin to heal
some of these problems that we see between community and police.

And they came back with 23 recommendations. One of them is a statewide use of
deadly force. And it is now being put into place everyplace across the state
of Ohio. Secondly, a policy on recruiting and hiring, and then more resources
for — for training.

But let me also tell you, one of the issues has got to be the integration of
both community and police. Community has to understand that that police
officer wants to get home at night, and not — not to lose their life. Their
family is waiting for them.

At the same time, law enforcement understands there are people in the
community who not only think that the system doesn't work for them, but works
against them.

See, in Ohio, we've had some controversial decisions. But the leaders have
come forward to realize that protest is fine, but violence is wrong. And it
has been a remarkable situation in our state. And as president of the United
States, it's all about communication, folks. It's all about getting people to
listen to one another's problems.

And when you do that, you will be amazed at how much progress you can make,
and how much healing we can have. Because, folks, at the end of the day, the
country needs healed. I've heard a lot of hot rhetoric here tonight, but I've
got to tell you, as somebody that actually passed a budget; that paid down a
half-a-trillion dollars of our national debt, you can't do it alone. You've
got to bring people together. You've got to give people hope.

And together, we can solve these problems that hurt us and heal America. And
that is what's so critical for our neighborhoods, our families, our children,
and our grandchildren. 


 You know, in our country, there are a lot of people who feel as though they just don't have the power. You know, they feel like if they don't have a lobbyist, if they're not wealthy, that somehow they don't get to play.

But all of my career, you know, having been raised in — by a mailman father
whose father was a coal miner, who died of black lung and was losing his
eyesight; or a mother whose mother could barely speak English. You see, all of
my career, I've fought about giving voice to the people that I grew up with
and voice to the people that elected me.

Whether it's welfare reform and getting something back for the hard-earned
taxpayers; whether it's engaging in Pentagon reform and taking on the big
contractors that were charging thousands of dollars for hammers and screw
drivers and ripping us off; or whether it's taking on the special interests in
the nursing home industry in Ohio, so that mom and dad can have the ability to
stay in their own home, rather than being forced into a nursing home.

Look, that's who I stand up for. That's who's in my mind...[_bell
rings_]...And if you really want to believe that you can get your voice back,
I will tell you, as I have all my career, I will continue to fight for you,
because you're the ones that built this country, and will carry it into the
future. Thank you. 


 Well, first of all, I had a national reporter say, you know, there's three lanes. There's the establishment lane, the anti-establishment lane, and then there's the Kasich lane.

And the reason is, is that I've been a reformer all of my career, fighting to
reform welfare, fighting to reform the Pentagon, also being in a position to
balance the budget, because that is very, very hard to do.

And then in Ohio, of course, I had to bring about big reform, again, because
we were so far in the hole and now we just found out we are up over 400,000
jobs since I took over as governor.

You know, the situation is this. We cannot fix things in this country — the
Social Security, the border, balancing the budget, getting wages to grow
faster — unless we lead as conservatives, but we also invite people in from
the other party. We have to come together as a country. And we have to stop
all the divisions.

And, you know, that's been my message in New Hampshire. And having been in New
Hampshire and here in Iowa, but in New Hampshire, I just received the support
of seven out of eight of the newspapers in that state because they see
positive, they see unity, they see coming together, and they see a record of
change and a record of accomplishment.

And it isn't because I'm all that great. It's because I've been assembling a
team of people who want to be involved in something that's a little bigger
than themselves. I'll keep — I'll keep heading in that direction, believe me.



 Chris...  ... there was a question about foreign policy, by the way, and experience. And I — I thought, if I didn't jump in, I might not be able to tell everybody this. I think they'd want to hear it.

Look, I served on...


 ... but wait a minute...


 ...the only reason is — look...


 OK.


 I've always listened to you, Megyn. Go ahead.


 Yes — thank you.


 Well, look the Joint Terrorism Task Force needs resources and tools. And those are made up of the FBI, state and local law enforcement. And Megyn, it's best not to talk anymore about back doors and encryption, it will get solved, but it needs to be solved in the situation of the White House with the technology folks.


 But I just have to tell you that it's best with some of these things not be said. Now I want to go back something. See, I was there when Reagan rebuilt the military. I was there in '89 when the wall came tumbling down because we were strong.

And I was there when we went into the Gulf War. We didn't win that war just
from the air, we won that war by assembling a group of Arab leaders who stood
in the Rose Garden and stood with America. We want to destroy ISIS, it has to
be in the air and on the ground. It has to be with our friends in the Arab
world and our friends in Europe, the coalition that we had when we went to the
first Gulf War.

And then when we win that, and we will win that against ISIS as it settles
down, and we should leave. Because we shouldn't be policemen of the world. But
what we need to do is turn it over to the regional powers to be able to handle
that.


 But we have a unique time in America to connect with people all around the world that understand that there's an existential threat against all of them, the Arabs, the Jordanians, the Saudis, the Egyptians, our friends in Europe, including the Turks. So we have a unique opportunity to bring everybody together.

I saw Reagan do it, I've seen other presidents do it. And frankly, if you want
to be commander in chief, you have to have the experience. At the same time
we're doing all that, the Pentagon must be reformed so we get what we need for
our men and women in uniform. All of that together, we're going to be just
fine and America is going to continue to lead the world.


 Well, you've got to be on top of it right away. And, you know, I don't know all the details of what Rick Snyder has done. I know there have been people who have been fired; people who are being held accountable. But the fact is, every single engine of government has to move when you see a crisis like that.

And I've had many situations in the state of Ohio where we've had to move,
whether it's storms, whether it was a horrible school shooting. There are many
crises that come — a water crisis in Toledo. You've got to be on top of it.
You've got to go the extra mile. You've got to work with local communities and
you've got to work with the federal government.

Because you realize that people depending on you. And so, you go the extra
mile. But people have to be alert. They have to be alert to problems. And when
you see a problem, you must act quickly to get on top of it. And people at
home are saying they've got a problem, listen to them. Because most of the
time, they're absolutely correct.

So the fact is that we work for the people. The people don't work for us. And
we have to have an attitude when we're in government of serving-hood. That's
what really matters. We serve you. You don't serve us. We listen to you and —
and then we act. 


 No. You know, Chris, here's what happened with Medicaid in my state. We took the growth of Medicaid from over 10 percent in my second budget to 2.5 percent, without cutting off one person or cutting one benefit, because we — we innovated the government.

And now mom and dad can stay in their own home, rather than being forced into
a nursing home. And then we decided we could bring $14 billion of our money —
I mean, Washington doesn't have any money. It was our money, and we brought
them back to tend to the mentally ill. Because I don't think they ought to
live in prison or live under a bridge; to treat the drug-addicted so they're
not in an in-and-out-of-the-door policy out of the prisons; and to help the
working poor so they don't live in emergency rooms.

How has it worked? Well, we have treated the drug-addicted in our prisons and
we released them in to the community, and our recidivism rate is less than 20
percent. That's basically bordering on a miracle because of our great prison
director. The mentally ill? They've been stepped on for too long in this
society, and we are beginning to treat them.

In terms of my faith, look, all I say is that when I study scripture, I know
that people who live in the shadows need to have a chance. But I'm not
deciding that anybody's got to make these decisions the way that I do, on the
basis of what I do. But what — I will tell you this. The time has come to stop
ignoring the mentally ill in this country and begin to treat them and get them
on their feet, along with, of course, with treating the drug-addicted.


Because we don't want them in and out — we don't want them in and out of the
prisons. Give people a chance. We talked about criminal justice reform. We've
enacted it in our state. Look, the conservative message is economic growth and
along with economic growth goes opportunity for everybody in America.
Everybody ought to have a chance to be able to rise to their God-given
purpose.

And that is what we have done in Ohio. We're running surpluses. We're up
400,000 jobs. And guess what? The formula is working. I'd suggest people take
a look at it.

Thank you. 


 Look, we don't know what's going to happen in ten months. And if I were president of the United States right now, I'd be lining up our allies to say that, if one crossed T or one dotted I does not occur, they are — violate the agreement, we slap back on sanctions.

We can slap on sanctions alone, on day one, but it's not gonna be anywhere
near as effective. But the president needs to be laying the groundwork right
now for the ability to slap those sanctions back on worldwide.

And I'll tell you what I'm worried about — I'm worried about money. You read
about all the companies now that are doing business — about to do business in
Iran, and if we don't get this settled now, with other countries in the world,
about sanctions, then Iran could violate that agreement, and we're the only
ones putting the sanctions on.

We need to move aggressively now. But I would say this to you, Bret. Number
one, if they violate it, we need to move against them. And number two, if we
find out they're developing a nuclear weapon and we know how to get to it,
we're gonna go take it out. That is what we have to do. We cannot let things
get farther down the road, like we did with North Korea.


 That's right. Yes.


 I know, Bret.


 But Bret, here's the problem. You take a look at the — at Belgium. I talked to a diplomat from Belgium. I said, "how's it going?" He said, "we have the military in the streets right now. We never dreamt we'd ever see it."

See, I think there is an opportunity to bring the world together. The Turks
are being threatened. We know about the French. We know about the Belgians. We
know about the Brits. Everybody is under fire and under attack, and we have to
stand together as an alliance.

So actually, the opportunity is there, because of the threat to all of these
countries, to bring all of us together...  ... and say there is
something more important than money. It is the future of the world and the
future of our children and grandchildren. That's the kind of leadership this
country needs. It has not been in effect during the administration of Barack
Obama.

And that's only the beginning of the failures that they have committed, not
only in the Middle East, but all over the world, including Russia and China.


 You know, one of our biggest national security issues is the world looks at us some time, and we look at each other and say, why can't we solve problems? Well, I've got news for you, we can. We can in fact create jobs and provide job security. We can create a situation where wages begin to rise. We can create a situation for our children to be able to get a decent job to pay down their college debt. We can re-assume our role in the world.

But all of this has to come together when we have a positive attitude, an
optimistic approach, an ability for us to set the tune as conservatives, to
invite other people in to be part of that orchestra.

You see, ladies and gentlemen, at the end of the day, I'm an optimist [_bell
rings_]

Because I've seen so many things get accomplished in my lifetime. And we can
do it again together, all of us, to strengthen this country, work together.
Thank you. 


 Well, we've got to to step up the pressure. And by the way, I've gotta say, after being here, every one of my 100 town hall meetings in New Hampshire were a lot more fun than what I saw here today, were so much more positive.

Look, in terms of North Korea, Martha, we have to make sure that we intercept
both the ships and their aircraft, because what they're trying to do is to
proliferate this very dangerous material, along with the — with the
technology, the instruments that can be used for mass destruction.

That's what I worry about the most, frankly, is non-state actors, people who
don't have a uniform, people don't have a country, who can spread this, who
are not subject to the — to the mutual assured defense. In other words, you
strike us, we strike you.

Some of these radicals, they don't care about that. That's what I worry about,
for my children, and for their children, going forward. So, we have to be very
tough.

And we should tell the Chinese, look, if you're not going to do this ballistic
missile defense to the Koreans, ballistic missile defense to Japan — and by
the way, we should impose the same kind of sanctions on North Korea that we
imposed on Iran, because they're able to shift money. They're able to send
money and receive money. 

We've gotta to be very tough on this. And frankly, I think we could have — I
think we could have let the Japanese know that if you want to take action on
that — on that missile that's rising, you want to take action — you will have
our support, if that's what you think is the best thing to do. We cannot
continue to be weak in the face of the North Koreans, or, frankly, in the
entire rest of the world.

Martha, this is — this is the — relates...


 Well, you know, David, I — I've just spent a lot of time here in this state, as I mentioned earlier, and we have to have practical solutions, just like we were just talking about a few minutes ago on North Korea. Look, the situation is, we need to finish the border. It has to be completed. Just like we lock our doors at night, the country has to be able to lock its doors. And we can have a guest worker program, where people can come in and out in an orderly way.

And then for the 11.5 million that are here, if they have not committed a
crime since they've been here, I believe they ought to pay some back taxes,
pay a fine, never get on the path to citizenship, but get legalization. It is
not — I couldn't even imagine how we would even begin to think about taking a
mom or a dad out of a house when they have not committed a crime since they've
been here, leaving their children in the house. I mean, that is not, in my
opinion, the kind of values that we believe in.

And secondly, I think at the end of the day, that Americans would support a
plan like this. I think Congress would pass a plan to finish the border, guest
worker, pay a fine, a path to legalization, and not citizenship. And we've got
to get this done. And I will tell you this, within the first 100 days that I
am president, I will put that proposal to the Congress. And I will tell you,
as a former Congressman, and an executive, in Ohio, I can promise you that I
believe you'll get the votes to pass that, and we can move on with that issue
and protect our border. That's what I think.


 Good evening.


 Well, first of all, look. As the New York Times said, he's certainly not a moderate, but he can bring people together to solve problems. The fact of the matter is I've cut taxes more than anybody in the country this year. I have balanced budgets, the federal budget, the state of Ohio budget, we're running a $2 billion dollar surplus, we're up 400,000 jobs, and in Washington we were able to have significant job growth whenever we balanced the budget of which I was the architect.

But, here's the beauty of it, it's not just balancing a budget, it's about
jobs. You know, when I was kid growing up in a neighborhood where Dad went
home at night and said, "I lost my job today", it just killed the family.

It just was a devastating effect. We have to have economic growth, but once we
have economic growth I believe we have to reach out to people who live in the
shadows. I believe we need to help the mentally ill, the drug addicted, the
working poor. We need to help the developmentally disabled to rise, and we
need to help our friends in the minority community develop entrepreneurship.
In other words, in American, conservatism should mean not only that some rise
with conservative principles, but everybody has a chance to rise regardless of
who they are so they can live their God given purpose. That's what
conservatism should be. 


 David?


 Look, I'm — I'm not here — I like Chris.


 Let — but let me — let me just tell you. First of all, we have the lowest number of state employees in 30 years.

Secondly, we have grown government at the rate of inflation. And I went from
an $8 billion hole to a $2 billion surplus. And we've grown jobs by 400,000 —
that's one of the fastest growing states in the country. Our pensions are
secure and our credit is rock solid.

Now, I've learned that, what makes things work, what gets the economy going,
not just in Ohio, but in Washington — and it's three things. Common sense
regulations, which we have, lower taxes, which we have, the lowest taxes, tax
cuts in the country. And thirdly, a fiscal plan to balance the budget.

When you go from $8 billion in the hole to $2 billion in the black, when you
cut taxes by $5 billion and you grow over 400,000 jobs, that is a record that
I can take to Washington, using the same formula that I used in Washington
when I was part of the effort to balance the budget to give us a surplus and
to create jobs.


 That's what I did and I'll do it again in the first 100 days.


 Well, right now the deals — there's no leadership. I mean, a lot of the things that we're talking about here tonight, on the border, and so many of the things. What we should be doing on foreign policy, you know what the problem is, Mary Katharine? There's not a leader that gets somebody to rise up.

You have to have a leader that can inspire, and actually some of what Donald
was saying is true. Look, do you know how hard it was...


 ... to get the balance the federal budget balanced? You have to plead with people. To do what we've done in Ohio, you have to plead with people, then you go back down to Washington and do the same thing.

You see, we have to remind people we're Americans before we're Republicans and
Democrats, and when we wait, and when we delay what we end up doing, Mary
Katharine, is we make the United States weaker. In fact, it's a foreign policy
issue because people look at America not solving problems and they say what
are they doing over there? So the point is you have to work with people.

The problem with executive authority for the president, it's really bad news
for this reason. Since he's given up on working with Congress, he thinks he
can impose anything he wants. He's not a king. He's a president. An executive
order should be used frankly in consolidation and with consulting with the
leadership in the — in the Congress.

I've done it in Ohio. I consult. I could use executive orders, but I don't
trump the legislature, because if you do, you aggravate them, you anger them
and then the long-term prospects get bleak. We have to solve problems in
America by coming together, Republicans and Democrats, Americans first, party
and ideology second — in the second back seat of this country. That's what we
need to do. 

And we can do it. And we can do it.


 Mary Katherine, let me just say this to you. 

You must have an agenda that you are ready to move on in the first 100 days.
Jeb is right. If you delay and you wait, the Washington operators will take
you down. I can tell you this, in the first 100 days, I will have legislation
to freeze federal regulations, have them reviewed by the vice president,
reduce state taxes on individuals, reduce taxes on corporations, have a fiscal
plan to balance the budget, get the border protected and begin to fix Social
Security in the first 100 days.

So, anybody who is here tonight, if I get elected president, head out tomorrow
and buy a seat belt, because there's going to be so much happening in the
first 100 days, it's going to make your head spin. We're going to move America
forward. I promise you. We're going to move us forward. 


 Jeb mentioned me. Time for me to go again.


 He says he didn't mention me the second time. I thought I heard it, Jeb. No. I'm just kidding. Thank you all very much for listening and being patient with all of us tonight. Thank you.


 David, David...


 I wanted — I wanted to say, look, this — there can be a win-win here. I have formed a collaborative between police and community leaders because people have to respect law enforcement. A family doesn't want dad or mom going home in a box. And for our community leaders, many of them think the system not only works — not only doesn't work for them, but it works against them.

And I created a big collaborative in Ohio made up of law enforcement,
community leaders, the head of my public safety and a former Democrat, liberal
Senate senator Nina Turner, run it. They got together, they made
recommendations on recruiting, on hiring, on the use of deadly force and what
we're about to do is to bring community and police together so we can have a
win-win.

We need more win-wins in America and we don't have to pick one over another
divide. We love the police, but we've got to be responsible to the people in
the community. We have to do all of that. 


 Josh?


 Josh, I mean, clearly, when a veteran comes home, they should get health care anywhere they want to go. In our state, which is what we should do in the country, you know, if they drive a truck from Kabul to Kandahar in Afghanistan, we say, you can drive a truck from Columbus to Cleveland, and you don't have to go get a license. We're going to hand you one.

And if you've got expertise in the military, we're going to give you college
credit or community college credit for the things that you did for our
country. And in addition to that, I'll tell you, one of the biggest things I
think has to be done — and I would do it as president — the Pentagon has got
to work with the returning soldier, sailor, along with the family, and we —
they're the most valuable employees in the country. I call them golden
employees.

Everybody wants to hire a veteran. But there is a disconnect between the job
openings and the veteran when the veteran comes back. The veteran is a leader.
The veteran is strong. The veteran is drug free. There should be no
unemployment among veterans.

And if the Pentagon will work with the veterans' services agencies all across
this country, Josh, we can get people jobs and we can get them jobs quickly,
get them their health care......get them their college
education. Let's lift them. They're the greatest people defending the United
States of America and we need to take care of them, and we will. We will.



 Carolina's going to win that one. I hate to say it. But they're going to win that one.


 Well, folks, I've done now over 100 town hall meetings and I've loved every second of it. It has been the greatest thing in the world. And I want you to know that you've changed me, because I've listened to your stories and I've had your hugs and I've seen your tears, and I've seen you walk away and say, I now have hope.

You know, I've had a conservative message, but a positive message — not just a
conservative message, but a positive message about how we can bring people
together, how we can restore America's strength, lift everyone. New Hampshire,
please give me a chance to carry this message forward to the United States of
America. And then, I will come back. Thank you, loved it. And God bless you.



 Well, John, first of all, if I were president, we wouldn't have the divisions in the country we have today. I do want to take a second as we reflected on Judge Scalia, it's amazing — it's not even two minutes after the death of Judge Scalia, nine children here today, their father didn't wake up. His wife, sad, but I just wish we hadn't run so fast into politics.

Here's my concern about this. The country is so divided right now, and now
we're going to see another partisan fight take place. I really wish the
president would think about not nominating somebody. If you were to nominate
somebody, let's have him pick somebody that's going to have unanimous
approval, and such widespread approval across the country that this could
happen without a lot of recrimination. I don't think that's going to happen,
and I would like the president just to, for once here, put the country first.
We're going to have an election for president very soon, and the people will
understand what is at stake in that election.

And so I believe the president should not move forward, and I think that we
ought to let the next president of the United States decide who is going to
run that Supreme Court with a vote by the people of the United...[_bell
rings_]...States of America. 


 First of all — yes. First of all, look, we have to make it clear to Russia what we expect. We don't have to declare an enemy, rattle a sword or threaten, but we need to make it clear what we expect. No. 1 is we will arm the folks in Ukraine who are fighting for their freedom. They deserve it. There will be no ifs, ands or buts about it.

Secondly, an attack on NATO, trumped up on any excuse of Russian-speaking
people, either in the NATO countries or in Finland or Sweden, is going to be
an attack on us. And look, I think we have an opportunity as America to put
something really great together again.

The Egyptians, the Saudis, the Jordanians, the Gulf states, they all know
they're at risk. We need to look into Europe, we look at France, we look at
Germany and the migrants. We look at Belgium, we look at Britain. Everybody
now is being threatened by radical Islam. We have an opportunity to lead.

You know, the fact of the matter is the world is desperate for our leadership.
Sometimes they may — they may make a remark here or there that we don't like,
but frankly, the world needs us. And we have an opportunity now to assemble a
coalition of the civilized people, those who respect civilization, the rights
of women, the rights to protest, to be able to reassert our leadership all
across this globe again and make sure this century is going to be the best
we've ever seen.


 I've got to tell you, this is just crazy, huh?  This is just nuts, O.K.? Jeez, oh, man. I'm sorry, John.


 Oh, well, listen, I think being in Iraq, look, we thought there were weapons of mass destruction. Colin Powell, who is one of the most distinguished generals in modern time, said there were weapons there. 

But, but, the fact is we got ourselves in the middle of a civil war. The
Sunni, the Shia and the Kurds, never gotten along. In fact, that country was
drawn — the borders of that country were drawn after World War I by Westerners
that didn't understand what was happening there. The tragedy of it is that
we're still embroiled. And, frankly, if there weren't weapons of mass
destruction, we should never have gone. I don't believe the United States
should involve itself in civil wars. Civil wars are not in our direct
interest, and if you — and look, I served on a defense committee for 18 years
and was called into the Pentagon after 9/11 by Secretary Rumsfeld to deal with
some of the most serious problems that we faced.

The fact is, is that we should go to war when it is our direct interest. We
should not be policemen of the world, but when we go, we mean business. We'll
do our job. We'll tell our soldiers, our people in the service, take care of
your job and then come home once we've accomplished our goals.

That's what we need to do.


 Yeah. Well, first of all, those numbers, incorrect. We are — our Medicaid programs are coming in below cost estimates, and our Medicaid program in the second year grew at 2.5 percent.

And Kimberley, let me tell you, when we expand Medicaid and we treat the
mentally ill, then they don't live under a bridge or live in a prison, where
they cost $22,500 a year.

When we take the drug addicted and we treat them in the prisons, we stop the
revolving door of people in and out of prisons, and we save $22,500 a year.

Guess what else? They get their lives back. And the working poor, they're now
getting health care. And you know that about a third of the people who are now
getting that health care are people who are suffering very serious illnesses,
particularly cancer.

So, what I would tell you is, we've gone from an $8 billion hole to a $2
billion surplus. We've cut taxes by more than any governor in America by $5
billion. We have grown the number of jobs by 400,000 private-sector jobs since
I've been governor.

Our credit is strong. Our pensions are strong. And frankly, we leave no one
behind. Economic growth is not an end unto itself. We want everyone to rise,
and we will make them personally responsible for the help that they get.

And that is exactly the program we're driving in Ohio. And, boy, people ought
to look at Ohio, because it has got a good formula. 


 Yeah, let me say a couple of things.

First of all, when Jeb was governor, his first four years as governor, he
expand — his Medicaid program grew twice as fast as mine. O.K.? It's just a
fact.

Now, with Obamacare, I've not only sued the administration, I did not set up
an exchange. And he knows that I'm not for Obamacare, never have been. But
here's what's interesting about Medicaid.

You know who expanded Medicaid five times to try to help the folks and give
them opportunity so that you could rise and get a job? President Ronald
Reagan.

Now, the fact of the matter is, we expanded to get people on their feet, and
once they're on their feet, we are giving them the training and the efforts
that they need to be able to get work and pull out of that situation.


 That's what we're doing in our state.


 Let me — let's tell you...


 Major — Major, we can't — we've got to — look, I have got to correct the record. And the fact of the matter is, we went from an $8 billion hole to a $2 billion surplus. We're up 400,000 jobs. Our credit is rock solid.

And I don't know...


 Look, the bottom line is the people of this — of this country and this state want to see everybody rise, and they want to see unity, and I don't want to get into all this fighting tonight, because people are frankly sick of the negative campaigning.


 And I'm going to stay positive about what I want to do from the... 


 Before I get to that, this is the ninth or 10th debate. What I've been watching here, this back and forth, and these attacks, some of them are personal. I think we're fixing to lose the election to Hillary Clinton if we don't stop this. 

I mean, the fact is — you know what? I would suggest, why don't we take off
all the negative ads and all the negative comments down from television and
let us just talk about what we're for, and let's sell that, and the Republican
Party will be stronger as a result...


 ...   First of all, I'm for sealing the border, O.K.? And then I'm for a guest worker program. People can come in, work and go back home. We haven't closed the border because special interests, I believe, blocked it. Then, we have 11 and a half million people here. If they have not committed a crime since they've been here, make them pay a fine and some back taxes, and give them a path to legalization, never to citizenship.

It is not going to happen that we're going to run around and try to drag 11
and a half million people out of their homes.

I'll tell you this. Within the first hundred days, I will send a plan like
this to the Congress of the United States, and if I'm president, I'll bet you
dollar to doughnuts right now, it will pass.



That is a reasonable proposal that the people of this country, in my judgment,
will support, and so will the bulk of the Congress of the United States.



 You know, John, I think all people are the same. Look, I did 106 town halls, and I've been doing them left and right here in South Carolina. The first thing we have to do is grow the economy, and I know the formula because I was chairman in Washington when we balanced the budget and created so many jobs, and the same that we've been able to do in Ohio. You need common-sense regulations so small business can flourish, you need lower taxes both on business and individuals, and you need a fiscal plan to be able to get ourselves in a situation where people can predict a little bit about the future when it comes to the fiscal issues.

And when you have that formula, combined with work force that's trained, you
can explode the economy and create many jobs. I have done it twice, and I want
to go back to Washington and do it again.

John, the thing is, is I think that there are people now, these blue-collar
Democrats — my dad was a blue-collar Democrat — the Democratic Party has left
them. When they're arguing about being socialists, they've left — they have
lost those blue-collar Democrats.

And you know what I think they get out of me — is my sense of what they get
out of me, and it's embarrassment about campaigns, you brag about yourself.

But I think I'm a uniter, I think people sense it. I think they know I have
the experience, and that I'm a man that can give people hope and a sense that
they have the opportunity rise. And I'll tell you, I love these blue-collar
Democrats, because they're going to vote for us come next fall, promise you
that. 


 Well, I want to thank the people of South Carolina. You've been fantastic. And look, what I want you to know is I'm going to send a lot of power, money and influence back to where we all live. But as I've traveled around South Carolina, I've noticed something. You know, it's that people have a sense that you're not going to wait on a president. You know, when I was a kid, we didn't wait on presidents to come to that little blue-collar town and fix things.

You know, the Lord made all of us special. The Lord wants us to be connected.
I believe we're part of a very big mosaic. And I'll send the power back. And
whoever gets elected president here, hopefully will take care of the issue of
jobs and wages and Social Security and the border.

But the spirit of the America rests in all of us. It's in our guts. It's
taking care of our children. It's taking care of the lady next door who just
lost her husband. It's fixing the schools where we live and telling kids to
stay off drugs. You see, I think what the Lord wants is for to us engage, and
in America, the spirit of America doesn't come from the top down. The spirit
of America rests in us. And I want to call on everyone in America to double
down and realize that you were made special to heal this country and lift it
for everyone.

Thank you all very much. And I hope I can have your vote in South Carolina.



 Well, you know, on the way over here, even getting ready earlier and sitting in the green room and watching the early coverage, you know, my father carried mail on his back and his father was a coal miner and my mother's mother was an immigrant, could barely speak English. And I'm standing on this stage. It's pretty remarkable. But I want to tell you, there's a lot of young people watching tonight. You can do whatever you want to do in your life. America is an amazing country, where a kid like me can grow up to run for president of the United States and be on this stage tonight. So to all the young people that are out there, your hopes, your dreams, pursue them. Shoot for the stars. America's great, and you can do it. Thank you, Wolf. 


 Look, we have a great president here, George Bush, the 41st president of the United States. He worked with Ronald Reagan to pass an effort to try to solve this problem — a path to legalization. You see, that was a time when things worked. It was a time when President Reagan and George Bush decided that we needed to make the country work.

Look, I think there is an answer here. The answer is you complete the border.
You let people know that once it's done, you don't have a right to come in. If
you come in, we don't want any excuse. You're going to go back. But I favor a
guest worker program. I think it's practical. And I think for the 11 million
or 11.5 million Americans — the illegals that are here, if they have not
committed a crime since they've been here, I'd make them pay a fine, some back
taxes, maybe some community service. And at the end, I'd give them a path to
legalization, but not a path to citizenship. I don't think we're going to tear
families apart. I don't think we're going to ride around in people's
neighborhoods and grab people out of their homes. I don't think — first of
all, I don't think it's practical and I don't think it reflects America.

You know what happened? The problem with President Reagan is we didn't get in
there and actually finish the border. And I think it was probably business
interests that affected it. But at the end of the day, let's be practical.
Let's start solving problems in this country instead of kicking them upstairs.
With President Reagan and George Bush, it was a bipartisan coalition to
address the issue, and I think we can and should do it again. And I will have
a plan in the first 100 days to get it done and get this issue behind us.



 Well, I'm not going to talk about that. I mean, I've got to tell you, I was with this little 12-year-old girl, was at a town hall meeting, and she said, you know, I don't like all this yelling and screaming at the debates. My mother's thinking I might not be able to watch the thing anymore.

I think we ought to move beyond that, about what they think. I'm going to tell
you what I think. My position on this whole immigration issue has been clear
from the beginning. I haven't changed anything with it.

And, look, my view is, we need economic growth. Everything starts with
economic growth. And how do you get it? Common sense regulations, lower taxes
for both business and individuals, and, of course, a fiscal plan that balances
the budget.

That gives you economic growth. I did it when I was in Washington, as the
Budget Committee chairman, negotiating actually with Democrats, that gave us
surpluses, economic growth, and the same thing in Ohio.

But here's the thing that I believe. Economic growth is not an end unto
itself. We have to make sure that everybody has a sense that they can rise.

Of course, our friends in the Hispanic community, our friends in the African-
American community, the promise of America is that our system, when we follow
the right formula, is going to give opportunity for everyone.

It's what Jack Kemp used to say. A rising tide lifts all boats, not just some
boats, but all boats. And you know what? With me and the Hispanic community, I
think they like me. And I appreciate that, because I want them to have the
same opportunity that I and my children and my wife and the people we love
have had in this country.

It's time to solve problems. 


 Well, you know, , of course. I mean, if — look, I was involved in just being a pioneer in a new church. Religious institutions should be able to practice the religion that they believe in. No question and no doubt about it.

Now, in regard to same-sex marriage, I don't favor it. I've always favored
traditional marriage, but, look, the court has ruled and I've moved on. And
what I've said, Hugh, is that, look, where does it end?

If you're in the business of selling things, if you're not going to sell to
somebody you don't agree with, OK, today I'm not going to sell to somebody
who's gay, and tomorrow maybe I won't sell to somebody who's divorced.

I mean, if you're in the business of commerce, conduct commerce. That's my
view. And if you don't agree with their lifestyle, say a prayer for them when
they leave and hope they change their behavior.

But when it comes to the religious institutions, they are in inviolate in my
mind, and I would fight for those religious institutions. And look, I've
appointed over a hundred judges as governor. I even appointed adjudge to the
Ohio Supreme Court.

And you know what they are? They're conservatives. Go check it out. They are
conservatives. They don't make the law. They interpret the law. That's all
they do. And they stick by the Constitution. So I will do that.

But let's just not get so narrow here as to gotcha this or that. I think my
position is clear.


 No, I wouldn't. And — but that doesn't matter when it comes to the issue of preexisting conditions. You don't want any American to lose their house, everything they've saved, because they get sick. Now, I think it is more complicated than what we've heard here tonight. We're actually running significant health reform in my state.

I would repeal Obamacare for a variety of reasons. I would take some of the
federal resources, combine it with the freed-up Medicaid program, which I
would send back to the states, and cover the people who are currently the
working poor because we don't want to have tens of millions of Americans
losing their health insurance.

And then we're driving towards total transparency. If any of you here ever get
a hospital bill, it's easier to interpret the Dead Sea scrolls than to
understand your hospital bill. The fact is what we need is transparency with
hospitals and with the providers.

And I'll tell you what we will do. We are actually going to make payments to
physicians and to hospitals who actually deliver healthcare with great quality
at low prices. We actually are going to make the market work.


 Well, Dana, the Heritage Foundation had this position as well. And when I look at it, I don't think it's tenable. And we don't need to do that. Again, I'm telling you that we are going to — we have a proposal, a plan that we're enacting now that says if you are a hospital or a doctor and you're providing very high quality at lower prices, below the midpoint — some charge high, some charge low. If you are below the midpoint, we are going to give you a financial reward for allowing you to provide services that result in high quality for our people at lower pricess.

That is the way in which we are going to damp down the rising costs of
healthcare. Because if you think about your own deductibles today, they're
going higher, higher and higher. And you know what? At some point, people
can't afford it. Our plan will work. It uses the market. It uses transparency.
It gets the patient in the middle. And guess what? We're actually doing it in
my state, the seventh-largest state in the country. And if this will go — this
will go national, we will get our hands on healthcare where you will know
what's going on. We will pay for quality, lower prices, and we will begin to
see healthcare become affordable in America and where people will also be able
to have health insurance, even if they have a preexisting condition.

We don't want to throw millions of people out into the cold and not have the
health insurance, Dana. So that's really what we're doing. This is not a
theory. This is what we are actually doing in our state. We will begin
payments next year based on episodes that we have in our lives. If our primary
care physicians keep us healthy for a year, with really high quality, guess
what? They will get a financial reward.

Our primary care physicians need help. They need support. We're losing them.
This will allow them to get a reward for doing a great job.


 Thank you. 


 How do you — how do you get that extra time, Cruz? You're very good at... 


 Well, I think it takes three things, Wolf. And I've done it. I mean, I — we got the budget balanced. We cut the capital gains tax. You see, in order to get this economy moving again, you have to grow the economy, and you have to restrain the spending.

And when I was chairman, we cut that capital gains tax and we instituted a
significant program to get to balance. We had a balanced budget four years in
a row, had to take on every interest group in Washington — every single one of
them — and we paid down a half a trillion of the national debt.

And why do you do it? Because you want job growth. If you don't have
regulatory reform, common-sense regulations, reasonable tax cuts, which I
have, and a fiscal plan, you won't get there. You will never be able to do it.

Now, I — I inherited an an $8 billion hole in Ohio, I have common-sense
regulations, I have tax cuts — the biggest of any governor in the country —
and we have a fiscal plan.

And it's not all — it's not always cutting. It's innovating — it's producing a
better product at, frankly, a lower price. Now we have a $2 billion surplus.
Our credit is strong, our pensions are strong.

And, look — I've got a plan to take to Washington, and I will have it there in
the first hundred days, and it will include shifting welfare, education,
transportation, Medicaid and job training back to us, so we can begin, in the
states, to be the laboratories of innovation.

I've done it — I did it in Washington — four years of balanced budgets. No one
could even believe it happened.  I've done it in Ohio, we're
growing, the jobs are up and people are having opportunity. And I will go back
to Washington and do it again for the American people. I promise you that.


Within the first hundred days, we will have the plan to get this done.


 OK, let me — let me — let me just talk about that, because I know that — that Donald believes the energy industry is important. So do I. But of the over 400,000 jobs that we've created in the state, we think maybe 15,000 are connected to this industry, because it's early-stage.

See, what we've done in Ohio, and what a president needs to do, is to have a
cabinet and a whole operation that's jobs-friendly. We have diversified our
economy.

We — we do have energy, we have medical devices, we have financial services,
we have I.T., we just got Amazon — their Cloud computing in the Midwest. You
know why it's happening? 

Because we're balanced budgets, we're strong, we're job-friendly, we don't
raise their taxes, and if we have a president that does that in America, we
will get the economic growth, and that is what this country needs. Jobs, jobs
and jobs, period. 


 Well, I mean, well, I was in Congress for 18 years on the Defense Committee. And then, you know, after 9/11, the secretary of defense called me in to help out with some things. And I've been a supporter of Israel — a strong supporter of Israel longer than anybody on this stage. I didn't give as much money as Donald gave, but I've been standing with the Israelis for a very long time.

And frankly, I think the problem we have in foreign policy right now, Wolf, is
that we are not certain with who we stand with. Our allies are not sure what
to make of us, and our enemies are moving. And one — are moving because
they're not sure what we will do.

It's a very interesting development here within the 24 hours. We said to the
South Koreans that we would give them the high altitude defense system. It
really rattled the Chinese, and for the first time since we took positive
action, the Chinese are beginning to take action against North Korea.

When we stand firm and we let the world know who we're with, who we stand for,
and we bring our allies together, that is the road forward.

 


 When you talk about regime change, Wolf, it means regime change. That's what it means. Even though there's so much chaos in North Korea right now, there's a lot of reports of uncertainty, and instability in that government.

But, look, here's what I think we ought to do — like, immediately. And, we've
been kicking the can down the road on this for, I don't know, 15 years. We
should be intercepting the ships that are leaving North Korea so they're not
selling this material, or this technology, or giving it to someone else.

Secondly, the same goes with the aircraft.

Thirdly, we need to slap even tougher sanctions on North Korea because we
really don't have the toughest sanctions on North Korea. We ought to talk
about arming South Korea with ballistic missile technology. And, of course,
also Japan with ballistic missile technology. Because we're now starting to
take a firm position. We have the attention of the Chinese. The Chinese are
the best way to calm that regime down and get them in a position of where they
back off.

But, when I say regime change, I don't have to talk exactly what that means.
Look, I've been involved in national security for a long time. You don't have
to spell everything out, but what I'm telling you is you look for any means
you can to be able to solve that problem in North Korea, and in the meantime
put the pressure on the Chinese. And, what we're doing is beginning to work
against them.

They are the key to being able to settle this situation.


 ... I'm very well aware of that.


 Wolf, again, it would depend exactly what, you know, what was happening. What the situation was. But, if there was an opportunity to remove the leader of North Korea and create stability? Because, I'll tell you, you keep kicking the can down the road we're going to face this sooner or later.

But, in the meantime, I'm also aware of the fact that there's 10 million
people living in Seoul. So, you don't just run around making charges. I have
put it on the table that I would leave to see regime change in North Korea.

Now, perhaps the Chinese can actually accomplish that with this man who is now
currently the leader, but the fact is we have to bring everything to bear. We
have to be firm, and we've got to unite those people in that part of the world
to stand firmly against North Korea, and make sure we have the
ballistic......ballistic missile technology to defend
ourselves.


 Hey, Wolf, Wolf...


 Hey, Wolf, let me just say this because he mentioned this. Look, we're all in agreement that the Japanese need to do more. We're all in agreement that the Europeans need to do more, but I hate to just tell everybody we are the leader of the world and we should put the pressure on them to do their job. There is no question about it.

But, at the same time, we also have to rebuild the military. Look, I have a
balanced budget plan that cuts taxes, reforms regulations, but also builds the
military, puts a $100 billion dollars more in defense. We need to rebuild our
defenses,

But, I must also tell you, a long time reformer of the Pentagon, we must
reform that building. 

We can't have a weapon system take 22 and a half years. We have 800,000
bureaucrats working for DOD, performing bureaucratic functions when we ought
to be putting...


 ... these resources into strengthening the military. So, we can do it all...


 There's a critical point that needs to be made here. 


 There's something — I want to — I want to point out something here today that is — it's so critically important — about how the Obama administration has really done such a ridiculous, feckless job here in foreign policy.

First of all, we should have been supporting the rebels long ago. They could
have taken Assad out, and because we did nothing, the Russians are in, and
they're sitting in the catbird seat.

We should have been helping them. I'm thankful that the aid trucks are finally
getting into Syria. But the fact is, had we had acted, we would have solved
that problem.

Now, let's talk about Libya. Libya didn't go down because there was some
people revolution. Hillary Clinton, Samantha Power and all these other people
convinced the president to undermine Gadhafi. They undermined him, and now
they have created a cesspool in Libya.

And let me just say to you — we have ISIS beginning get — get a foothold in
Libya. We're gonna have to deal with it. There are not many major cities in
Libya. They're on the coast, which — mostly, it's desert, but it's a problem.

Then we have ISIS in — in Syria, and we have ISIS in Iraq. Because this
administration has not had a strong and firm foreign policy, we are going to
inherit — one of us here is going to inherit a total mess...


 ... and we're going to have to work our way out of it, including...


 ... the need to arm the Ukrainians. They have been ignored, and we need to help them as well...


 ... and assert ourselves as America.


 I want to weigh in on this please. I want to just tell you that the problem is not right now between the administration and Apple. You know what the problem is? Where's the president been? You sit down in a back room and you sit down with the parties and you get this worked out. You don't litigate this on the front page of the New York Times, where everybody in the world is reading about their dirty laundry out here.

The president of the United States should be convening a meeting, should have
convened a meeting with Apple and our security forces. And then you know what
you do when you're the president? You lock the door and you say you're not
coming out until you reach an agreement that both gives the security people
what they need and protects the rights of Americans. This is a failure of his
leadership to get this done as an executive should be doing it.

And I'll tell you, that's why you want a governor. I do this all the time. And
we reach agreements all the time. Because as an executive, you've got to solve
problems instead of fighting on the front page of the newspaper.


 Thank you.


 Well, the last USA Today poll had me beating Hillary Clinton by 11 points, more than anybody on this stage. Secondly, I hope you saw tonight that executive experience really matters. It matters in terms of growing our economy, balancing budgets, cutting taxes, reforming regulations. I've done it in Washington, I've done it in Ohio, and I can go back to Washington and do it again.

But I hope you also noticed tonight that I do have the foreign policy
experience, not just a few years, but a lot of years in working with some of
the great, great minds in this country to develop the expertise, the
confidence, the firmness, the toughness and the ability to bring people
together.

I hope you all think about giving me your vote. I would appreciate it very
much. And I tell you, we won't have to spend time figuring what we're going to
do. I will hit the ground running and we will get America moving again. Thank
you all very much. 


 You know, this so much about process. It frankly is boring to me. I would like it clear though, since we're talking about polls, I beat Hillary Clinton by more than 11 points, and the reason it happens...


 ... The reason it happens...


 ... You know, the reason is because, as the Democrats tell me all the time, I can get the crossover votes. You see, because throughout this campaign I've talked about issues, I have never tried to go and get into these scrums that we're seeing here on the stage. And, people say everywhere I go, "you seem to be the adult on the stage." 

In terms of — you know, Mitt Romney's a great guy, but he doesn't determine my
strategy. The fact of the matter is I'm running for president because I worked
hard to fix this country when I was in Washington as the Chairman of the
Budget Committee where we had some of the most significant job growth after we
balanced the budget.

We had wages going up, it was very successful in Ohio. Our wages grow faster
than the national average. We're up over 400,000 jobs. We paid down, back in
the old days, they paid down half a trillion dollars of the national debt.
It's a formula that works. And, I believe that formula will work when I return
to Washington as the president.

And, by the way, I won't need on the job training because I know how to do all
of this, and within the first 100 days I will have a plan that will pass the
Congress because...... It is reasonable, and I can bring both
sides together...


 ... Well, Bret, I think we're all really there. I mean, the simple fact is that, you know, you all wrote me off. You wrote me off before I even got to New Hampshire, then when I finished in New Hampshire you wrote me off in the South, then you wrote me off in Super Tuesday.

I split delegates in Vermont with Donald Trump, I finished second in
Massachusetts, and we won delegates in Virginia. But, guess what? It's now
March Madness and we're heading up North to the place — to my turf, OK?


And, let me just tell you this, I will win Ohio, and I am going to move all
across this country, and over time as people begin to finally hear my message
— you know what people say, Bret, to me all the time?

Why don't they give you any time on the debate stage? Why is that?


So now all of a sudden, I'm starting to get it, and what I want the people to
know is, I know how to bring people together, Republicans and Democrats. I
have successfully, both at the federal level and the state level brought
economic growth, wage growth, and economic security to this country.

And I want to go back and do it again, and I'm going to keep talking about my
message of bringing people together and motivating people in the neighborhoods
that realize they don't need somebody from Washington galloping in. There are
many things they can do where they live, because the strength of our country
is in our neighborhoods and our families. And I'm going to keep doing this.



 Can I...


 Well, well, wait a minute, first of all, I didn't say I was for an increase in the federal minimum wage. I said in Ohio we increased it modestly every single year. So I'm not for a federal minimum wage increase.


 Well, states — if states want to do it, they ought to sit down with businesspeople and the lawmakers and figure out what will work. But hold on a second here with everything else.

I'm the only person on this stage who actually was the chief architect of
balancing the federal budget. It's not a theory for me. It's not — it's not
some — you have to know how to put everything together. And you know, I spent
10 years of my life to get there, and I did not do that because I'm worshiping
at some balanced budget shrine.

The reason I did it is when you have commonsense regulations, lower taxes on
individuals and businesses, and you have a fiscal plan that makes sense, the
job creators will expand employment. And what happened? When I was there, the
jobs were exploding. Bill Clinton's tried to take credit for it. When I went
to Ohio, we're up 400,000 jobs. It's the same formula.

But it isn't easy. I fought the entire Washington establishment and won,
because when you balance a budget, you must affect every single thing.
Everything in the federal government specifically. You cannot get there with
theories or broad statements, and you have to be willing to take the heat. In
fact, I fought a Republican president, who I thought was not offering
constructive proposals to fix this economy.

So when we talk about all this, there's one person on this stage and one
person who's been a candidate for president in either party that restored
economic strength, growth, a balanced budget, paid down debt, cut taxes, the
things that people in this country want. No theories. Reality. 


 Well, first of all, just to be clear, not only did I serve for 18 years on the Defense Committee, more than anybody on this stage, but, secondly, I was called into the Pentagon after 9/11 to help Secretary Rumsfeld with some of his difficulties.

I will say, look, let me tell you what happened with Libya. And I pointed out
in the last debate — Hillary Clinton worked aggressively to depose Moammar
Gadhafi. We had no business doing it. He was working with us. He was
cooperating with us. He denuclearized. And now they pushed him out, and now we
have a fertile ground for ISIS.

Fortunately in Libya, there's only a few cities on the coast, because most of
Libya is a desert. The fact of the matter is, we absolutely have to be — and
not just with special forces. I mean, that's not going to work. Come on.
You've got to go back to the invasion when we pushed Saddam Hussein out of
Kuwait. We have to be there on the ground in significant numbers. We do have
to include our Muslim Arab friends to work with us on that. And we have to be
in the air.

And we — it should be a broad coalition, made up of the kinds of people that
were involved when we defeated Saddam. Now, you've got to be on the ground and
in the air both in Syria and Iraq. And at some point, we will have to deal
with Libya. I am very concerned about ISIS getting their hands on the
oilfields in Libya and being able to fund their operations. The fact is cool,
calm, deliberate, effective, take care of the job, and then come home. That's
what we need to do with our military foreign policy. 


 Bret, it's very interesting to note, I think it's for the good of the record here that they took a survey of foreign policy magazines, 700 foreign policy experts, who would be the best person to conduct foreign policy of all the candidates in the race?

I received 55 percent of the vote. Jeb Bush received 30 percent of the vote.
And everybody else, none of them made double digits. And that's because you
have to have the experience.

And you know, we hear about Ronald Reagan rebuilding the military. I was there
when Ronald Reagan rebuilt the military. I worked with him. I was there when
Ronald Reagan rebuilt the economy. I was there, and I worked with him. I knew
Ronald Reagan.

And I'll leave it right there with what comes after that. You can figure that
one out.


 Megyn.


 I did 200 meetings in New Hampshire, I don't know how many in Michigan now. In these townhalls people come in and they're very emotional meetings. And, you know what they really want to know? If somebody tells them something, can they believe it?

And, the reason why people are so upset in this country is because politicians
all the time tell them what they want to hear. And, they go to Washington, or
they go to the state capital, wherever, and they don't deliver on those
promises.

You know, when I ran for Governor of Ohio, I said not only would we balance
the budget, but we would cut taxes. People said that can't be done. I wouldn't
have said it if I didn't believe it.

We cut taxes in Ohio more than any governor in the country, and $5 billion
dollars worth of tax cuts — we're not running a surplus in Ohio. But, you see,
what's getting in the hearts and souls of the people is they want change, and
they keep putting outsiders in to bring about the change, then the change
doesn't come. Then they put more outsiders in because we're putting people in
that don't understand compromise. They don't understand policy...[_bell
ringing_] ...They're getting more and more frustrated with the
system which is why we must pick somebody that has a record of achievement,
not just talk.


 Not just talk, but a record of achievement. That's how we'll restore credibility..


 All right, look, honestly, when I see people at these meetings, these town halls, where we take massive questions, and I get to spend time with them. Last night, there was a woman that came to tell me about the loss of her 15-year-old son, who took his own life.

See, there's people in this country — and Ted's right — their wages haven't
gone up for so long, they see the rich get richer, they believe, and they're
not moving. And they put their money in the bank, and they got no interest on
their money. They receive none. And their sons or daughters are living in the
basement because they can't get a good job after they rang up so much college
debt.

What people are hungry for is, who can fix this? People want to know who —
what can you do to solve the problems in Washington, to make sure that we have
stronger job growth and better wages? But you know what else they're yearning
for? They want to believe that they have the power to fix things where they
live, and they want the power back, so they can begin to do things in their
community.

Now, listen, this has been going on for a long time here. And I appreciate the
discussion back and forth. But there are a lot of people out there yearning
for somebody who's going to bring America back, both at the leadership level
and in the neighborhood, where we can begin to reignite the spirit of the
United States of America. And let's stop fighting. 


 Well, look, first of all, I think the mayor now is controlling the schools. This is not much different than what happened in Cleveland, Ohio, where the African-American Democrat mayor, the union, and business leaders came to see me and said, "Would you help us to pass legislation to really create a CEO environment so that we can take control of the schools?"

We even invested in a buyout plan, where we bought out the teachers who had
been there a long time, because there were so many young teachers who had been
laid off who were so enthusiastic to get back in the schools. It worked
beautifully. Cleveland's coming back. The Cleveland schools are coming back
because of a major overhaul.

It's the same thing that has to happen in all of our urban schools. And,
frankly, look, if I were president, I'd take 104 federal programs, bundle them
into four buckets, and send it to the states, because fixing schools rests at
the state and the local level, and particularly at the school board level.


Now, I also believe — I also believe that you need to introduce vocational
education in those schools. You need mentoring in those schools. And you need
to have a situation where people can have an alternative forum to get a
degree. And you need school choice, both vouchers and charter schools. All of
those things can come together to help, Megyn.

But here's the bottom line. And I'll go quickly. We as adults have to fight in
our neighborhoods, in our communities, for our children's education. Put the
politics aside, and everyone in this room can play a role in lifting their
schools and lifting the students who are in those schools, because too much
politics gets in the middle of it, and where we focus as adults, and put
children first, we see tremendous results. And the people of this town are
going to rise. And they need to be involved. Thank you. 


 If you're in the business of selling things, if you're not going
to sell to somebody you don't agree with, today I'm not going to sell to
somebody who's gay, then tomorrow maybe I won't sell to somebody who's
divorced.




 Well, look, first of all, I try to be a man of faith every day as best as I can, and I try to focus in my faith on the dos and I think the don'ts will take care of themselves once I get the dos right, which is humility, and loving my enemy, and caring for my neighbor.

But secondly, look, you're in the commerce business, you want to sell somebody
a cupcake, great. OK? But now if they ask you to participate in something you
really don't like, that's a whole 'nother issue, OK? Another issue.

Here's what I'd like to see happen. The Supreme Court ruled, I don't agree
with the ruling. I'm of favor of marriage between — you know, traditional
marriage, a man and a woman. What I hope was going to happen after the Supreme
Court ruling is things would settle down.

If you go to a photographer to take pictures at your wedding, and he says, I'd
rather not do it, find another photographer, don't sue them in court. You know
what, the problem is in our country — in our country, we need to learn to
respect each other and be a little bit more tolerant for one another.

And at the end of the day, don't go to court. Can't we have common sense in
America? That's the way it used to be. And there was a book written called
"The Death of Common Sense." We need to bring it back.

But at the end of the day, if somebody is being pressured to participate in
something that is against their deeply-held religious beliefs, then we're
going to have to think about dealing with the law.

But you know what, I'd rather people figure this out without having to put
another law on the books and have more arguments in this country. Why don't we
come together as a country, respect one another, love one another and lift
this country? I think that's what people want.

So thanks for asking.


 I'll have to see this.



> 
 That was a pretty good one.


 No, I...


 Of course.


 I'm not biting. Let me take you around the world, OK? Let me — look, I'm going to take you very quickly.

In Russia, we need to tell them we're going to arm the Ukrainians with
defensive lethal weapons. And we're going to tell Putin if you attack anybody
in Eastern Europe in NATO, you attack Finland and Sweden, which is not in
NATO, consider it an attack on us. And he will understand that.

Secondly, I would tell the Chinese you don't own the South China Sea. Stop
hacking us. And we're going to beef up our cyber command. And we're going to
be in a position to be able to take out your systems if you continue to do
this.

Now let's move over into the Middle East. The Egyptians, they know they're on
their last legs there because of the attack from ISIS. The Jordanians are —
really have been our friends. They know that they are at risk. So do the
Saudis. So do the Gulf states.

They are our allies, really, or have similar aims, we need to bring them
closer to us. Turkey a critical avenue to the Middle East. We have to bring
them towards the West, and not towards the East.


 And we have a joint, good human intelligence. That is called a semi-trip around the world. And if you gave me more time, I'd finish the trip.


 Thank you.


 Yeah. But — and I kind of think that, before it's all said and done, I'll be the nominee. But let me also say...

But let me also say, remember...


 But I'm the little engine that can. And, yeah, look, when you're in the arena, and we're in the arena. And the people out here watching — we're in the arena, we're traveling, we're working, we spend time away from our family, when you're in the arena, you enter a special circle. And you want to respect the people that you're in the arena with. So if he ends up as the nominee — sometimes, he makes it a little bit hard — but, you know, I will support whoever is the Republican nominee for president. 


 Well, ladies and gentlemen, I love being here in Michigan, and I want to say to all of you here that I have a record of being able to solve some of the biggest problems. It's not just talk, and it's not theory.

I did it in Washington by helping people get into a healthier economic
situation. I've done it in Ohio. And as we've made progress in Ohio, we've
left no one behind. We've not left behind the mentally ill, the drug addicted,
the working poor, the developmental disabled, and we have raised our minority
community.

And as president of the United States, I will go back to Washington, I will
take the formulas that I used, and I will — I will fix the problems in
Washington, and you'll work with me as I send you power to fix your — your
communities, your neighborhoods, your state, and together, we'll restore the
spirit of America. And I know you want that. Thank you. 


 Well, thank you. You know, I look in the faces of people all across this country, and I know they want to be hopeful. And many are hopeful. Look, I can take conservative policies to the White House, to Washington, to restore the strength of our economy. But I also want to transfer power, money and influence to where you live, because I believe the strength in this country rests in the neighborhoods, the families, the communities and our states.

And I believe it's a new partnership — a partnership that can allow us to
restore the spirit of America and strengthen America for the best century
we've ever had.

Thank you. 


 Well, Jake, I grew up in a blue collar family. And the simple fact of the matter is that of course we're sensitive about trade. One out of five Americans works in a job connected to trade; 38 million Americans are connected to it.

But my position has always been we want to have free trade, but fair trade.
And I've been arguing all along that it is absolutely critical that when other
countries break those agreements, we don't turn the process over to some
international bureaucrat who comes back a couple years later and says, "Oh,
America was right," and people are out of work.

The fact of the matter is we have to have an expedited process. When people
cheat, when countries cheat and they take advantage of us, we need to blow the
whistle. And as president of the United States, I absolutely will blow the
whistle and begin to stand up for the American worker.

But we don't want to lock the doors and pull down the blinds and leave the
world. Because frankly, if we do that, prices will go up. People will buy
less. Other people will be out of work. And we don't want to see that happen.

Trade, though, has to be balanced and we have to make sure that when we see a
violation, like some country dumping their products into this country, believe
me as president, I will stand up and I will shut down those imports because
they're a violation of the agreement we have and the American worker expects
us to stand up.

And Jake, my family worked in the steel industry, not with a white collar. I
understand their plight. 


 Well look, I believe in immigration, but it has to be controlled. The simple fact of the matter is I wouldn't be standing here. I'd be maybe running for president of Croatia if we didn't have immigration.

Immigration is something that brings youth and vibrance and energy to our
country. But we clearly have to control our borders. We can't have people just
walking in. Look, we lock our doors at night in our homes. The country has to
be able to lock its doors as well. So, we — I have a comprehensive plan to
deal with this problem of immigration.

I would say we have to absolutely finish the wall and guard the border. And if
anybody were to come in after that, they are going to have to go back. No
excuses because we can't continue this problem. I think we ought to have a
guest worker program, where people come in, work and go home.

And I think at the same time, for the 11 and a half million who are here, then
in my view if they have not committed a crime since they've been here, they
get a path to legalization. Not to citizenship. I believe that program can
pass the Congress in the first 100 days.

But let's not lose sight of the fact that the whole key to the future of
America is strong economic growth with common sense regulation, lower taxes
and a balanced budget.

We can have a rising tide that lifts all the workers in America, all the
people who are citizens of America, if we'll just follow the formula that
works, that I used in Washington. And guess what, I've used it in Ohio to grow
over 400 private sector jobs since I've been governor


 Well, look, all I'm in favor of in Ohio is high standards. First of all, let me tell you, I would take 125 federal education programs, put them in four buckets, and send them back to the states. OK, I've been working on this for many, many years.

Secondly, Jake, in our state, the state school board sets the standards. And
we want high standards because we have not always had high standards,
unfortunately. They set the standards and the local school boards develop the
curriculum.

Not only did we have that in the law, we reasserted it in the law. And we also
want parental advisers in the local school district so that, in fact, you
know, frankly, education has to be run at the school board level with a little
guidance from the state.

Now on top of that, you want to talk about the 21st Century and what we need
to do with our kids? We need to start connecting them to the real world. We
need to be training them for the jobs of the 21st Century, not the jobs of 20
years ago.

We need vocational education starting in the seventh grade where kids can get
that kind of education that can take them to college, but all the way through
their K through 12 they ought to be connected with real-world jobs.

Frankly, what ought to happen is we ought to get them to pursue their God-
given talents and connect them with the things that give them passion. And
that's exactly what we're doing in Ohio, combined with mentoring programs to
talk to kids about what their future can be.

So let me be clear, local control, obviously, high state standards. That's
what it is in the state of Ohio. 


 Well, first of all, we hear about taking on Washington. I took on Washington and I won. I actually got the budget balanced when I was a member of the Congress, the chairman of the budget committee. We paid down a half a trillion dollars of the national debt. We also balanced the budget four years in a row. And we were just growing jobs like crazy and the wage issue was not even an issue then.

I also had a plan in 1999 to save Social Security and take the $5 trillion
projected surplus and not only have Social Security for our young people, but
also to give them private accounts. Now there are more 18-year-olds who
believe they have a better chance of seeing a UFO than a Social Security check
and we have a lot of seniors who are very nervous.

I have a plan to fix it that doesn't even require raising the retirement age.

If you've had wealth throughout your lifetime, when the time comes to be on
Social Security, you'll still get it. It will just simply be less. And for
those people who depend on that Social Security, they'll get their full
benefit. That's the way it will work. And we don't have to monkey around with
the retirement age. And how do I know that? I've done all this before.

This is not a theory. Do you have to take on entitlement programs to balance a
budget? Yes. It doesn't mean you have to cut them. It means you need to
innovate them, the way we do things in the 21st Century.

So not only did we have a balanced budget in Washington, but when I went to
Ohio, we were $8 billion in the hole and now we're $2 billion in the black.
Our credit is strong. We're up 400,000 jobs. And I want to go back with the
same formula to beat the Washington insiders again.

And I will get it done, and this country will be much stronger economically as
a result. 


 No, I don't. I think there is a sect of, you know, this radical Islam that is really, really serious, and poses the greatest threat to us today. There isn't any question. And that's why the whole world has to work together to make sure that we don't have proliferation of these weapons of mass destruction.

But look, I was there when, and saw it, when the Egyptian ambassador to the
United States was in the Rose Garden bringing the Arab Muslim world to work
with us to repel Saddam Hussein from Kuwait. The fact is that if we're going
to defeat ISIS, we're going to have to have these countries. And they are
Egypt. And they are Saudi Arabia. And they are Jordan. And they are the Gulf
states.

And we're going to have in some way or another a rapprochement with Turkey.
And I frankly think the Europeans went in the wrong direction when they
rejected Turkey from joining in to the economic sphere of Europe. The simple
fact of the matter is, a lot of these Muslim countries, they are just — they
can't believe the stuff they see out of people who have distorted their faith.

Look, the people who represent radical Islam, they want to destroy everything
that we're about and other Muslims who don't share their view. But at the end
of the day, we've got to bring the world together, the civilized world. And we
all speak with one voice to make sure that people who sit on the fence
understand what civilization is, and we represent it, and equality and hope
for everybody.


 Well, there's no question. They were saying that the Israelis intended to go to the Dome of the Rock. And I mean, when you think about this, thank goodness we work with Israelis to give them the Iron Dome where they can protect themselves against all the missiles that were flying in. Could you imagine living in like Miami here and having people shooting missiles in?

Secondly, there was just an article the other day, Hugh, that I know you're
familiar with the Israelis are learning to train underground in combat because
the Palestinians now, Hamas in particular, is digging these tunnels trying to
get under Israel. They're coming at them from above, they're trying to come at
them under the ground.

And I just have to tell you this, I don't believe there is any long-term
permanent peace solution. And I think pursuing that is the wrong thing to do.
I believe that every day that we can stability in that region by supporting
the Israelis and making sure they have the weapons and the security that they
need with our 100 percent backing is the way to proceed in the Middle East in
regard to Israel. 


 Hugh, I've said all along and laid out my foreign policy, I'm going to remind everybody that 55 percent of the foreign policy experts in this country said I was the best to be commander-in- chief. I spent 18 years on the Defense Committee, Armed Services, and then I was in the Pentagon with Donald Rumsfeld after 9/11, in and out for a couple of years.

We absolutely have to win this with a coalition. Arabs have to be with us. The
Europeans have to understand that this threat is closer to them than even is
closer — is as close as it is to us. And in addition to that, you have to be
in the air and you have to be on the ground.

And you bring all the force you need. It has got to be "shock and awe" in the
military-speak. Then once it gets done, and we will wipe them out, once it
gets done, it settles down, we come home and let the regional powers redraw
the map if that's what it takes.


 I don't — I haven't seen the provisions of that bill, Jake. My initial instincts are no. And let me just say about the V.A. When a veteran comes home, they ought to have access to healthcare wherever they want to go at any time, number one.

Number two, the Veterans Administration needs to be restructured. It needs to
be downsized and spread out. It needs to be so responsive to the needs of the
veterans.

And secondly, the Pentagon needs to share the information of returning
veterans with the veterans' service operations in the states and with the job
people in the states so that when a veteran comes home, they can be linked
with a job.

And when that happens, that means that every veteran will get work, because
they're our golden employees. No veteran ought to be without healthcare; no
veteran ought to be homeless; and no veteran ought to be unemployed in the
United States of America.


 No, I wouldn't. Listen, I think the problem with the administration, if you talk to our friends around the world, they say what is America doing? You know, you don't support us, we can't figure out where you are.

You won't arm the freedom fighters in Ukraine, we let the Russians trump up
some excuse in the business of Russian-speaking people. You had a red line in
Syria. You walked away from it. You refused to fund the Syrian rebels, you
undercut Egypt and we ended up with the Muslim brotherhood for awhile.

And then we turn our back on Netanyahu when he comes to Congress to talk about
his concerns of the Iranian deal. Look, I know in human nature sometimes
there's a sense that you make better with your enemies than you do with your
friends. And you know what happens when you do that? You make a terrible
mistake.

You need to support your friends, you need to hold your enemies out
here......and you need to negotiate tough deals. The fact is, they
need to understand who we are. The Chinese understand. They don't own the
South China Sea. They have to stop hacking everything we have in this country
or we'll take out their systems. We will arm the Ukrainians so they have
lethal defensive aid.

We will destroy ISIS and Mr. Putin, you better understand, you're either with
us or you're against us. We're not rattling a sword. You're not our enemy but
we're not going to put up with this nonsense any longer.

And a strong America is what the entire world is begging for. Where has
America gone is what many of our allies say around the world.



When I'm president, they're going to know exactly where we are because we're
coming back.


 Well, I — I do believe we contribute to climate change, but I don't think it has to be a, you know, either you're for some environmental stringent rules or, you know, you're not going to have any jobs. The fact is, you can have both.

In our state, we've reduced emissions by 30 percent. But let me tell you also
what we're trying to do. We want all the sources of energy. We want to dig
coal, but we want to clean it when we burn it. We believe in natural gas. We
believe in nuclear power.

And you know what else I believe in? I happen to believe in solar energy, wind
energy, efficiency, renewables matter.

Now, it doesn't mean because you pursue a policy of being sensitive to the
environment, because we don't know how much humans actually contribute. But it
is important we develop renewables. Battery technology can unleash an entirely
different world.

So the fact is that you can have a strong environmental policy at the same
time that you have strong economic growth and they are not inconsistent with
one another.


 I think that the Chinese government butchered those kids. And when that guy stood in front — that young man stood in front of that tank, we ought to build a statue of him over here when he faced down the Chinese government. 

Now I will tell you, I don't believe that we need to make China an enemy. They
are a competitor. But I want to go back to three things they should do. We
should have the heat on them to work in North Korea to get rid of that guy and
the things that he's doing, number one.

Number two, they need to realize they don't own the South China Sea. And I
will compliment the administration for sending a carrier battle group into the
South China Sea. And thirdly, when it comes to the issue of cyber attacks,
we're going to have to beef up the cyber command.

And they need to understand that if you attack us we will defend ourselves,
everything, including our grid. But if you do it, we have the capability to
take out your systems. The president has not given the cyber command that
authority. I will.

And when it comes to trade, I will tell you this, they can't manipulate their
currency. That will not be anything that I would allow them to get away with.
And if I saw them doing it, I would take immediate action and make sure that
the American worker is protected. 


 Well, I worry about the violence at a rally period. I mean, it's — you know, elections are important but the unity of this country really matters.

Jake, here's what I think is happening. There are people out there who are
worried about their jobs. They're worried that somebody is going to come in
and tell them they're out of work and they're 54 years old and they don't know
where they're going to get another job, a man and a woman.

Maybe they're worried about a trade deal. They're worried about the fact that
their wages haven't gone up. They're worried that their kids went to college
and the promise was, you go to college, you get a job, things are going to be
great.

They went to college, they rang up debt and they're still living in their
parents' basement. People are uptight. Our seniors are worried they're going
to lose their Social Security. There's two ways to treat it.

You can either prey on that and be negative about it, or you tell people that
these things can be fixed. If we're Americans rather than Republicans and
Democrats, we get together, we can solve all of these problems.

We can provide financial security, we can drive the wages up, we can get kids
jobs with a more robust economy.



And you know what? They want to help solve these problems right where they
live and I'll give them the power to do it.


 Well, first of all, let's not — you know, math doesn't tell the whole story in politics. The great thing about politics, the reason why we watch it is because what's true today is not necessarily true tomorrow. So let's not get ahead of ourselves. Secondly, look, when you went to school up there in Salem, Ohio, OK.

If you got an 86, you got a B. Because everybody else had an 84 didn't mean
you got an A. So you just have to win enough delegates to be the nominee.

And frankly, I don't know if we're going to get a convention like that. But if
we do, I was at one in 1976 as a wee lad and supported Ronald Reagan and
actually worked directly with him. He tried valiantly. He lost. Gerald Ford
won. The party was united. Gerald Ford served the country great by pardoning
Richard Nixon. He lost the election probably because of that, but he put
America first. And we were healed as a party.

So, look, you have to earn the delegates in order to be picked. But let's not
get ahead of ourselves. We don't know what's going to happen because we still
have about half the delegates to be selected. And that's what's going to be a
very interesting thing to see how it all turns out as we move forward over the
next couple of weeks. 


 Well, look, my record speaks for itself. What I talk about tonight is not a theory. These are things that I've done. I was there when we reformed the Pentagon on a bipartisan basis to give control to the commanders in the field and force the services to work together. I was the chief architect, along with Senator Domenici, of the last time we balanced the budget and the first time since we walked on the moon. I was there when I worked on the welfare reform in Washington. And we got it done and we eliminated the entitlement on welfare,

I then went to Ohio and took Ohio from a basket case, working in a bipartisan
basis to reform many things, including the Cleveland public schools, working
with a Democratic mayor.

My problem isn't that people don't know this. They say, well, what does that
mean? Does that mean you're too easy? Well, let me tell you, when we did the
balanced budget, we cut the capital gains tax, we provided a family tax
credit, we shrunk the government.

In my state, the state of Ohio, has the smallest government in the state of
Ohio in 30 years. Conservative principles will work. But show respect to the
other side.

One final thing, in regard to Social Security, we will not get that done
alone. We will have to have some responsible Democrats who will come in to fix
the problem of Social Security. I know how to do it because I've done it and
I'll do it again. 


 Well, I'd like to say to all of you, the American people, I have run an unwavering, positive campaign for president of the United States. I have tried to be positive in such a way as to show my record, my accomplishments, my vision.

And I wanted to raise the bar in presidential politics so our kids can take a
look at the way you can run for president and you will someday maybe be
president of the United States.

Sometimes being positive isn't all that interesting, but it's very interesting
to my family, my children and so many supporters that I meet all across the
country and I will continue to run a positive campaign.

I can fix the problems in Washington, I've done it before. And, in fact, I
want to turn power, money and influence back to you, the American people, so
that you can be in the schools and on the streets fighting drugs and dealing
with the issues of poverty. We can do this together.

Allow me to take care of the federal issues when I send the power back and the
money and the influence to you and you can strengthen our nation and our
neighborhoods and our families. That's where the spirit and strength of
America is.

But ask the people — my friends in Illinois and of course, my beloved Buckeyes
to consider me on Tuesday and, please, let me have your vote. God bless.



