 We have to continue because it's not just the Iraqi vital national security interests that are at stake here, it's America's vital national security interests. If we fail in Iraq, we will see Iraq become a center for al Qaeda, chaos, genocide in the region, and they'll follow us home. 

After we lost the war in Vietnam, we came home, they didn't follow us home.
You read Zarqawi, you read bin Laden, you read al Qaeda, they'll tell you they
want to follow us home.

I believe we have a new strategy and a good strategy. Only four of the five
brigades that are -- that we need to implement the strategy are there.

It's long, it's hard, it's tough, it's difficult. Americans are frustrated
because of the mishandling of this war. But our national interests -- the
United States' national interests are at stake. I believe the Maliki
government has got to improve. They've got to pass certain laws that we all
know about. But we must succeed, and we cannot fail, and I will be the last
man standing if necessary.


 Well, first of all, I didn't say that I was wrong. I said that the reason why I opposed those tax cuts was because we didn't rein in spending. 

And the fact is the tax cuts have dramatically increased revenues. If we don't
make them permanent, then every business, farm and family in America will have
to adjust their budgets to what is in effect a tax increase.

In 2001, I proposed massive tax cuts, but I also proposed to rein in spending.
Spending is out of control. We didn't lose the 2006 election because of the
war in Iraq; we lost it because we in the Republican Party came to Washington
to change government and government changed us. We let spending go out of
control. We spent money like a drunken sailor, although I never knew a sailor
drunk or sober with the imagination of my colleagues. By the way, I received
-- (laughter) -- I received an e-mail not long ago from a fellow who said -- I
repeat this story -- "As a former drunken sailor, I resent the way that
Congress continues being compared to members of Congress." (Laughter,
applause.)


 Did I get left out? 


 Well, the first issues you mentioned have to do with bipartisanship, have to do with reaching across the aisle and work for the good of the American people. 

That's what I intend to do. That's what leadership is all about. And the
reason why congressional approval ratings -- I saw at 28 percent as -- and you
get down to blood relatives and paid staffers when you get down that low --
(laughter) -- is because they want us to work together, they want us to reach
across the aisle on issues that are important to America.

We need to have immigration reform. Is there anyone who believes our borders
are secure? We need to act on issues that affect America that are in the
nation's interests, that we should work together, as they used to in the past
when I first came to Congress. I promise you, I will reach across the aisle.

But what this is really all about is who's most prepared to lead in this
challenge, this transient, central challenge that we face called radical
Islamic extremism? My life, my experience my knowledge of the military and
national security qualifies me most to lead.


 Well, of course. I have never supported amnesty and never would. But the point is that what the American people expect us to do is to sit down and work this issue out together. That's what I've been doing for a couple of years now. We are very close to an agreement, led by our president and his Cabinet members -- Chertoff and Gutierrez. We are very close to an agreement that will first secure our borders. Then we would have a temporary worker program that could only be valid through a tamper-proof biometric document. 

And then we would address the issue of the 12 million people who are already
here.

My friend, the people that came -- that almost attacked us at Fort Dix --
thank God they did not -- those people didn't come here across our borders,
they came with visas that were expired. So we've got to enforce our border.
That's our first and foremost priority. But we also have to have a
comprehensive solution and it has to be bipartisan. And I believe we're close
to reaching that, and that's what the American people expect us to do.


 The status quo is unacceptable. 


 Sure. Sure. 


 Actually, I've been heavily engaged in all -- all of the negotiations and in phone calls and conference calls and various meetings as short a time ago as Friday, and a conference call yesterday. That's why I can assure you we are very close to an agreement. I've been heavily engaged in it and I continue to be heavily engaged in it. 

I come from a state of Arizona where over the half of the illegal crossings
cross -- come across the Arizona-Sonora border.

I intend to lead. I don't intend to follow. I don't intend to block things. I
intend to get results, and I intend to work on the hard things, not the easy
ones.


 Well, I've -- take and kept a consistent position on campaign finance reform. Is there anyone who believes there's not enough money washing around money in politics, which has corrupted our own party? I have kept a consistent position on right to life. And I haven't changed my position even -- on even-numbered years or have changed because of the different offices that I may be running for. 


 That's -- 


 It is not flying on top of capitol. It is flying at the -- 


 It is not flying on top of the capitol. 

Yes, I was wrong when I didn't say it -- well, when I said that I believed
that it was up to the state of South Carolina. That was a wrong statement on
my part.

Now, after long negotiation amongst most parties, there is an agreement that
that flag no longer flies on top of the capitol of the state of South
Carolina.

Almost all parties involved in those negotiations believe that that's a
reasonable solution to this issue. I support it. I still believe that it
should not have flown over the capitol, and I was wrong when I said that it
was a state issue. But now I think it has been settled, and I think it's time
that we all moved on on this issue -- especially the people of South Carolina.
(Applause.)


 If I knew for sure that they had that kind of information, I, as the president of the United States, would take that responsibility. That is a million-to-one scenario. But only I would take that responsibility. 

The use of torture -- we could never gain as much we would gain from that
torture as we lose in world opinion. We do not torture people.

When I was in Vietnam, one of the things that sustained us, as we went --
underwent torture ourselves, is the knowledge that if we had our positions
reversed and we were the captors, we would not impose that kind of treatment
on them.

It's not about the terrorists, it's about us. It's about what kind of country
we are. And a fact: The more physical pain you inflict on someone, the more
they're going to tell you what they think you want to know.

It's about us as a nation. We have procedures for interrogation in the Army
Field Manual. Those, I think, would be adequate in 999,999 of cases, and I
think that if we agree to torture people, we will do ourselves great harm in
the world.


 Yes, and the interesting thing about that aspect is that during the debate, when we had the detainee treatment act, there was a sharp division between those who had served in the military and those who hadn't. Virtually every senior officer, retired or active- duty, starting with Colin Powell, General Vessey and everyone else, agreed with my position that we should not torture people. 

One of the reasons is, is because if we do it, what happens to our military
people when they're captured? And also, they realize there's more to war than
the battlefield.

So yes, literally every retired military person and active duty military
person who has actually been in battle and served for extended times in the
military -- (bell rings) -- supported my position, and I'm glad of it.


 I'm John McCain. I've had the honor of serving my country all of my life. 


 I did not read that particular document. I received hundreds of briefings, tens and hundreds of hours of study and background and information on it. And the fact is, that the sanctions were breaking down. The sanctions were not going to hold. We had a multi-billion-dollar scandal in the form of oil-for-food. The fact is that Saddam Hussein had used weapons of mass destruction before on his own people and on his enemies, and if he'd gotten them again, he'd have used them again. That was his commitment and his belief that he was going to, and he did the right thing. The problem was the mismanagement of the conflict. 


 Well, let me say, first of all, I know how frustrated and saddened all Americans are. This morning I was with the family of Matthew Stanley of Wolfeboro, who sacrificed his life, and our hearts and our sympathy goes out to all those who have sacrificed their lives in this conflict. 

I, one, think this strategy needs to be given a chance to succeed. We haven't
barely gotten the fifth brigade over there, which is part of this strategy. I
am convinced that if we fail and we have to withdraw, they will follow us
home. It will be a base for al Qaeda, and we will be facing greater challenges
and greater sacrifices than that already made by Matthew Stanley and his
family.

There is no doubt in my mind that this will become a base for terrorism, there
will be chaos in the region.

And when Senator Clinton says this is Mr. Bush's war, that this is President
Bush's war - when President Clinton was in power, I didn't say that Bosnia,
our intervention there was President Clinton's war. When we intervened in
Kosovo, I didn't say it was President Clinton's war.


 What he - what Senator Clinton doesn't understand, that presidents don't lose wars, political parties don't lose wars; nations lose wars and nations lose the - have the consequences of failure. 


 We must succeed in this conflict. 


 Then you have to examine the options. And I'll tell you the options. One is the division that Sam described. You would have to divide bedrooms in Baghdad, because Sunni and Shi'a are married to each other. You have 2 million Sunni and 4 million Shi'a living in Baghdad together. 

You would have to - you withdraw to the borders and watch genocide take place
inside Baghdad. You watch the destabilization of Jordan. You see further
jeopardy of Israel because of the threats of Hezbollah and Iranian hegemony in
the region. All of the options I could run through with you; my friend, none
of them are good. That's why we must succeed and give it a chance to succeed.


 Well, first of all, I agree with Judd Gregg. He's a great senator. (Applause.) 

Second of all, Rudy you just described our legislation, so I'd be glad to have
further conversation with you because it does account for people who are here
illegally, it does have an employment verification system, and it weeds out
those who shouldn't be here, and it gives others a chance to remain in this
country.

Look, this is a national security issue first and foremost. Ever since 9/11
it's a national security issue. People came to Fort Dix, New Jersey from
across our Southern border and tried to kill our soldiers. For us to do
nothing is silent and defacto amnesty. What we have done is what you expect us
to do, my friends, and that's come together with the president of the United
States, the leader of our party, Democrat and Republican, conservative
Republicans like Jon Kyl, Johnny Isakson, Saxby Chambliss and Trent Lott, and
sit down and figure out an approach to this problem.

And it is a serious national security problem. We need to act, my friends, and
if someone else has a better idea, I'd love to have them give it to us.
(Cheers, applause.)


 That - that will get the support of enough people so that we can pass legislation. This isn't the bill that I would have written, but it does - 


 \- it does satisfy our national security challenges, which are severe and intense, and we can not allow 12 million people - 


 \- washing around America illegally, my friends. And I hope you'll examine the legislation - 


 \- and I hope we can move forward with it, and we can make it better. 


 But it's our job to do the hard things, not the easy things. (Cheers, applause.) 


 (Laughs.) I think it's fine. 

I would like to remind you that we made treaties with Native Americans, such
as the Navajos in my state, where we respect their sovereignty and they use
their native language in their deliberations. It's not a big deal. But Native
Americans are important to me in my state.

Everybody knows that English has to be learned if anyone ever wants to move up
the economic ladder. That is obvious. And part of our legislation, by the way,
is a requirement to learn English.

And by the way, 30 percent of the people who are in this country illegally
never came across our borders, my friends. They overstayed their visas. That's
why it has to be a comprehensive approach. And I'm proud of the support of the
president and his brother, Governor Jeb Bush, who was governor of the state of
Florida. People who have to deal with this issue every day understand we have
to act, my friends. And we can have our own ways to improve it, but if we
don't address this issue, we are going to pay a heavy price because something
bad could happen when 12 million people are in this country illegally - two
million of them having committed serious crimes. (Applause.)


 (Inaudible.) 


 No, I believe that's up to the school districts. But I think that every American should be exposed to all theories. But I can't say it more eloquently than Pastor Huckabee - Governor Huckabee just did, and I admire his description, because I hold that view. 

The point is that the time before time - there's no doubt in my mind that the
hand of God was in what we are today. And I do believe that we are unique, and
I believe that God loves us. But I also believe that all of our children in
school can be taught different views on different issues. But I leave the
curricula up to the school boards.


 Sure, I think we all do. And they ought to be reinvesting it. And one of the areas that they ought to be involved in is nuclear power. Nuclear power is safe, nuclear power is green - does not green - emit greenhouse gases. Nuclear power is used on Navy ships which have sailed around the world for 60 years without an accident. And of course we ought to be investing in alternate energy sources. 

Recently there was a group of retired military officers who said that climate
change an energy independence is a national security issue. It is. We've got
to reduce our dependence on imported oil. We can do it through a wide variety
of alternative fuels. But we have to be serious about it, and we're going to
have to go places where we have never gone before. And nuclear power is one of
the major issues, but also all kinds of ethanol as well, so.


 We have the best-trained, most professional, best- equipped, most efficient, most wonderful military in the history of this country, and I'm proud of every one of them. (Applause.) There just aren't enough of them. So I have to rely on our military leadership, who - in whom we place the responsibility to lead these brave young Americans in combat as we speak. 

So I think it would be a terrific mistake to even reopen the issue. It is
working, my friends. The policy is working. And I am convinced that that's the
way we can maintain this greatest military. As much as revere the "Greatest
Generation," as much as love my own generation, this is the very best. Let's
not tamper with them.


 He's going through an appeal process. We've got to see what happens here. 


 It's not, and I want to tell you, thank you for your brother's service and sacrifice to our country. We are proud of you and your endurance, and we're proud of your sacrifice. 

This war - I'm going to give you a little straight talk. This war was very
badly mismanaged for a long time, and Americans have made great sacrifices,
some of which were unnecessary because of this management of the -
mismanagement of this conflict.

I believe we have a fine general. I believe we have a strategy which can
succeed, so that the sacrifice of your brother would not be in vain; that a
whole 20 or 30 million people would have a chance to live a free life in an
open society and practice their religion no matter what those differences are.

And I believe if we fail, it will become a center of terrorism, and we will
ask more young Americans to sacrifice, as your brother did.

This is long and hard and tough, but I think we can succeed. And God bless
you.


 Well, first of all, Governor, muchas gracias. (Laughter, applause.) We need to enforce our borders. There is indeed a special path, it's especially hard, it's eight to 13 years. 

My friends, we know what we're talking about is the latest wave of migrants
into this country. We have to stop the illegal immigration, but we've had
waves throughout our history. Hispanics is what we're talking about, a
different culture, a different language, which has enriched my state where
Spanish was spoken before English was.

My friends, I want you the next time you're down in Washington, D.C. to go to
the Vietnam War Memorial and look at the names engraved in black granite.
You'll find a whole lot of Hispanic names. When you go to Iraq or Afghanistan
today, you're going to see a whole lot of people who are of Hispanic
background. You're even going to meet some of the few thousand that are still
green card holders who are not even citizens of this country, who love this
country so much that they're willing to risk their lives in its service in
order to accelerate their path to citizenship and enjoy the bountiful, blessed
nation.

So let's from time to time remember that these are God's children. They must
come into country legally, but they have enriched our culture and our nation
as every generation of immigrants before them.

Thank you. (Cheers, applause.)


 Spending, spending, spending, spending, which led to corruption. We have members - former members of Congress in jail as we speak because of this earmarking. We let spending get out of control, we presided over the largest increase in the size of government since the Great Society, and our constituents and our Republicans became dispirited and disenchanted. We've got to stop the earmarking. The bridge to nowhere, the 233 miles - a $233 million bridge to an island in Alaska with 50 people on it was the tipping point. 

I want to promise you, as president of the United States, I'll veto every bill
that has a pork-barrel project on it, and I'll make the authors of it famous,
and we'll get spending under control, and we'll stop the corruption in
Washington. (Applause.)


 It's beyond my realm of thinking. Look, America is the land of opportunity. The question was just asked, "What is it to be an American?" It's to share a common goal that all of us - a principle - are created equal and endowed by our creator with certain inalienable rights. 

That means we go as far as our ambition will take us. That means we have a
better life for ourselves and our children. And the lady that holds her lamp
beside the golden door is still the ideal and the dream. Of course it has to
be legal. Of course it has to be regulated. And 18 months, by the way, will go
by while we fix the border before we do anything else on this issue.


 But America is still the land of opportunity and it is a beacon of hope and liberty, and as Ronald Reagan said, a shining city on a hill. And we're not going to erect barriers and fences. 


 Protect the family, that's one of the questions earlier. Protect our American family, it's under assault in many respects, as we all know. And second, take the lead in fighting this transcendent issue of our time: the battle and struggle against radical Islamic extremism. It is a force of evil that is within our shores. Look at the events of the last few days at JFK, attempts at Fort Dix, the London suicide bombers. 

My friends, this is a transcendent struggle between good and evil. Everything
we stand for and believe in is at stake here. We can win. We will never
surrender, they will. I am prepared to lead. My life and my experience and my
background and my heroes inspire me and qualify me to lead in this titanic
struggle which will not be over soon, but we will prevail.


 Well, I think that's a decision that Fred should make. Maybe we're up past his bedtime, but the point is -- (interrupted by laughter). You know, one thing I know about New Hampshire and I know well is that the people of New Hampshire expect to see you. They expect to see you a lot, and they expect to see you at townhall meetings and at places all over this great state of New Hampshire. And they expect to see you before they make up their mind. 

One of the many Arizonans who ran for president of the United States
unsuccessfully, like all of us -- (laughter) -- Morris Udall. Once -- he was a
very funny man. As you know, once he said -- a fellow in Manchester said to
the other one, "What do you think about Mo Udall for president," and the guy
said, "I don't know. I only met him twice." And you know the reason why that
joke is funny is because it's true, and my advice to Fred is get out into the
arena, Fred.

It's a lot of fun.


 I thought that -- I thought was a pretty good line. 


 I wish I'd have written it myself. 


 Look, this is an emotional and passionate issue, and one that -- very seldom have I seen an issue that aroused this much passion with the American people. 

No one, by the way, is for amnesty. I and the president of the United States,
both of us from border states, came forward with a plan that we thought was
comprehensive and workable, with the priority being border security, which
remains my position.

Why we failed is because the American people have lost trust and confidence in
us -- our failure in Katrina, our failures in Iraq, our failures to control
runaway spending, and so we failed. So obviously we have to succeed because
there's 12 million people who are in this country illegally, which is defacto
amnesty, and we need a temporary worker program.

I'd commit to securing the borders first. We can secure those borders. As
president, I would have the border state governors certify that those borders
were indeed secure. We can sit down together. Governor Romney less than a year
ago had the exact same position that I did.


 Well because amnesty according to the dictionary is forgiveness. The proposal that we had would require fines, would require back of the line, would require deportation for some, it would require others to go back to the country of their origin; it would require an enormous amount before anyone as long as 13 years could even be eligible for citizenship in this country. 

There's 12 million people who are here illegally. We were trying to find a way
to identify, track, deport those necessary, and those who have been here for
some 40 or 50 years then give them, after everybody else who's come here
legally, a place in line behind everybody else. It was a comprehensive
proposal.

I was in Baghdad over the 4th of July, and I was present at a ceremony where
688 brave young Americans re-enlisted. A hundred and twenty-eight brave young
Americans who were green card holders were given citizenship in this country.

Two of them that were supposed to be there had sacrificed their lives prior to
that.


 On these people -- these people are brave, they've wonderful, and they want to be citizens of this country. And I'm proud of them. (Applause.) 


 Well, I say that Mayor Giuliani did a great job as mayor of New York City and led the country and inspired us after the tragedy of 9/11, and I admire that and appreciate it. 

I've spent my life on national security issues. I've taken unpopular stands
because I knew what was right. Back in 2003, amid criticism from my fellow
Republicans, I spoke strongly against the then-Rumsfeld strategy which I knew
was doomed to failure and caused so much needless sacrifice. I advocated very
strongly the new strategy that some Democrats have called the McCain strategy
-- (chuckles) -- which it is not, and I believe that the strategy is winning.
I know the conflict. I know war. I have seen war. I know how the military
works. I know how the government works. I understand national security.

I have led. I had -- I was once the commanding officer of the largest squadron
in the United States Navy. I didn't manage it; I led it. (Applause.)


 Governor, the surge is working. The surge is working, sir. It is working. 


 No, not apparently -- it's working. 

It's working because we've got a great general. We've got a good strategy.
Anbar province: Things have improved. The Maliki government is not doing the
things we want it to do. The police are not functioning the way we want them
to do.

But we are succeeding, and the great debate is not whether it's apparently
working or not. The great debate is going to take place on the floor of the
United States Senate, the middle of this month. And it's going to be whether
we set a date for withdrawal, which will be a date for surrender, or whether
we will let this surge continue and succeed.

And I can assure you, it's more than apparent. It is working, and we have to
rally the American people.

The people of New Hampshire are saddened and frustrated and angry over our
failures in Iraq. I share their anger, their frustration and their failure,
and I want them home, too, but I want them home for the right reasons. I want
our troops home with honor, otherwise we will face catastrophe and genocide in
the region.


 I have a very dear and beloved friend whose name is General Jack Vessey, who was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under President Reagan. He served in four wars, and he's one of the great leaders I've ever known. 

I called him, and I said, "General Vessey, do you think we ought to ever
torture anybody?"

General Vessey said any information that we may gain through the use of
torture can never, ever be counterbalanced by the damage it does to America's
reputation and the risk -- (cheers, applause) -- and the risk that when an
American is in the hands of an enemy, that they will use the fact that we
tortured people as an excuse to torture our brave men and women in the
military.

I'm not prepared to expose them to that.

MR. : They don't need an excuse.


 And it was interesting, during the debate on torture, the retired military, from Colin Powell on down and others, sided with me. Those who had no military experience took the other side. 

By the way, Governor Huckabee, thank you for your kind words.


 Because I stand on my record, and my record is 24 years of opposing tax increases, and I oppose them, and I'll continue to oppose them. I think it's very clear that the increase in revenue that we've experienced is directly related to the tax cuts that were enacted, and they need to be made permanent rather than the family budgets and businesses being uncertain about their future. 

But my proposal in 2000 and 2001 was not just to cut taxes, but to stop
spending, and we let spending get out of control. We destroyed the trust and
confidence of our Republican base of fiscal conservatives. We allowed spending
to get out of control to the point where it bred corruption. And I don't say
that word lightly; we have former members of Congress in federal prison as we
speak. I pledge to the American people I will veto every pork-barrel bill that
comes across my desk, and I will make the authors of those pork-barrel
projects famous, and that's what I've been doing for a lot of years.


 Because there's no point. I stand on my record. I don't have to sign pledges. My record stands -- (chuckles) -- for itself. It's very clear to the American people. I've been in this business a long, long time. 

But the point is that I voted against the tax cuts because there was no
restraint in spending. We had automatic restraints in spending included in my
tax-cut package, and we would be talking about additional tax cuts today if we
hadn't let spending get out of control and preside over the largest increase
in the size of government since the Great Society -- not a record we should be
proud of.


 At the end of the day, we cannot allow Iran to have nuclear weapons. Now I believe that we can do a lot of things. We can have a league of democracies to impose sanctions and to cut off the -- many of the things and benefits that the Iranians are now getting from other democracies. I think it's clear that the United Nations Security Council will not act effectively with Russia and China behaving as they are. 

But let's see what Iran has been doing. Your hypothetical is closer to reality
than many of us appreciate. The Iranians are sending lethal IEDs that are
killing American soldiers. They're training and equipping terrorists. They
have dedicated themselves to the destruction of the state of Israel. They are
arming Hezbollah. They are supporting Syria, and there's no doubt they're
moving forward with the acquisition of a nuclear weapon. We need to work
together with our allies, but at the end of the day, it's the United States of
America that will make the final decision.

On January of 2000 -- of 1981, Ronald Reagan came to power and raised his hand
as president of the United States of America. By more than coincidence the
Iranian hostages returned on that same day. I would employ some of his
methods. (Applause.)


 They're paying their -- everybody's paying taxes, and wealth creates wealth. And the fact is that I would commend to your reading, Ron, "Wealth of Nations," because that's what this is all about. A vibrant economy creates wealth. People play -- pay taxes. Revenues are at an all-time high. 

What's the problem? It's not just here in Michigan. It's in the heartland of
America. We're losing industrial jobs, and we're not taking care of those who
are left behind. Every town hall meeting that I have, people say, "I don't
know if I'm going to have health insurance or not."

We're going to have to bring costs under control -- of health care -- if we're
going to assure people that they're going to have retirement and they're going
to be able to have the much-needed medical care that they are -- need as they
grow older.

The fact is that Social Security's going broke. The fact is that Medicare is
going broke. That's a little straight talk, and we've got to fix it. And we
have to get spending under control.

And we Republicans, who came to power in 1994 to change government, government
changed us. And unless we get spending under control and eliminate all this
waste and pork-barrel spending -- and the latest is this public works, $21
billion worth of pork-barrel projects in public works, which the president
should veto. Another one he should veto is the SCHIP program, which we should
say -- take the "C" out of because now it's for everybody, like every other
entitlement program. And by the way, a dollar a pack increase for cigarettes?
So we want to take care of children's health and we want everybody to smoke? I
don't get it. And we've got to get wasteful spending under control.
(Applause.)


 Sure it's fair. Should we -- because the bulk of the taxes are paid by wealthy people. Should we reform our tax code, which is completely broken, which no one understands, no living American understands? Absolutely we should fix our tax code, and we should fix it immediately. And we should have Congress either vote up or down on a freer, fairer, simpler tax code, and I believe that Americans deserve that. (Cheers, applause.) 


 I'd like to say yes, Chris, but I think we are in the midst of a revolution that we haven't seen the Industrial Revolution. A lot of people don't know that 50,000 Americans now make their living off eBay. We know that people have been left behind. We know that the tax code is eminently unfair. 

We know that one of the big problems right here in Detroit is that when they
-- before they turn a wrench on a new car, it's a $1,700 legacy cost for
health care for their retired employees. For Toyota, it's 200 (dollars). We're
going to have to fix health care. We're going to have to fix Social Security.

And this line about it's just discretionary spending that's a problem -- the
problem is, my friend, the American people no longer have trust and confidence
in us that we will fix anything. As president, I'll fix them.

And the point is that we need to have job retraining programs. We need to go
to the community colleges. We even need, if you're a senior laid-off worker
and -- who gets another job to make up in compensation for the amount of money
that's the difference between the job that they lost -- we have to fix these
programs, but first we've got to go to the American people with clean hands.
We've got to tell them we've stopped spending $3 million to study the DNA of
bears in Montana. I don't know if that's a paternity issue or a criminal
issue. (Laughter.) I've got -- we've got to tell them -- we got to tell them
that we will not spend $2 billion on an aircraft tanker, which I was able to
stop and save the taxpayers $2 billion, because of this incredible extravagant
waste in defense spending today, which is the biggest part of our budget.
(Applause.)


 Yes, of course, they have to pass the required security requirements and everything like that. But I'm a student of history. Every time the United States has become protectionist and listened to the siren song that you're hearing partially on this stage tonight, we've paid a very heavy price. The Smoot-Hawley Tariff Acts in the 1930s were direct contributors to World War II. It sounds like a lot of fun to bash Chinese and others, but free trade has been the engine of our economy in the last half of this year, it will continue to be, and free trade should be the continuing principle that guides this nation's economy. 


 I would have asked Americans, when we were incredibly united -- as part of that, I'd give credit to my friend the mayor of New York City -- and Americans were ready to serve a cause greater than themselves, I would have told them, first of all, consider the military; also the Peace Corps, also AmeriCorps, also neighborhood watches, also volunteer organizations that we would form up all over America. That way we would all serve this nation. 

I'd just like to mention I'm the only one on this stage that four years ago
said this is a failed policy in Iraq; it's not going to work; it's got to be
changed. I was criticized by Republicans for my severe criticism of Secretary
Rumsfeld. I advocated the strategy that's succeeding. And thank God the
American people are giving us a little window so we can let this thing succeed
and not have happen, as the president of Iran recently said, the United States
will leave Iraq, and there will be a vacuum, and Iran will fill it. That's
what's at stake here.


 We're dealing of course with hypotheticals. If the situation is that it requires immediate action to ensure the security of the United States of America, that's what you take your oath to do when you're inaugurated as president of the United States. If it's a long series of build-ups, where the threat becomes greater and greater, of course you want to go to Congress; of course you want to get approval if this is a(n) imminent threat to the security of the United States of America. 

So it obviously depends on the scenario, but if I were -- I would at minimum,
I would at minimum consult with the leaders of Congress because there may
become a time where you need the approval of Congress, and I believe that this
is a possibility that is maybe closer to reality than we are discussing
tonight.


 I would hope that they would use those profits to further the cause of alternate energy, nuclear power, a lot of other ways that we have to employ in order to eliminate our dependence on foreign oil. 

By the way, I wouldn't drill off the coast of Florida unless the people of
Florida wanted to. And I wouldn't drill off the coast of California unless the
people of California wanted to, and I wouldn't drill in the Grand Canyon
unless the people in Arizona wanted to.


 I -- what's that? 


 I would not require them to. But I think that public pressure and a lot of other things, including a national security requirement that we reduce and eliminate our dependence on foreign oil -- and we stop the contamination of our atmosphere, which is -- and climate change, which is real and is taking place. 

And we have now a confluence of two national security requirements. One is to
address the issue of climate change, and nuclear power is a very big part of
that. And it's also a requirement to not allow Chavez in Venezuela, Putin in
Russia and the president of Iran to dictate world events, bully their
neighbors and use oil as a weapon which would probably further terrorism and
endanger this nation's national security. (Applause.)


 The American people no longer have trust or confidence in our government -- our failure -- Katrina, our failures in Iraq, our failures to get spending under control -- and we've got to restore that trust and confidence. If we're going to have real immigration reform, we're going to have to have trust that we will secure the borders. 

The American people want us to stop the outrageous wasteful spending which has
caused our Republican base to become disenchanted and disillusioned. We're
going to have to do some -- make some tough decisions and make some hard
choices. The American people are ready to accept them, but they want for us to
be straight with them, and they want straight talk, that they will know the
challenges and they will rise to meet them.


 I think the unions have played a very important role in the history of this country to improve the plight and conditions of laboring Americans. 

I think that like many other monopolies, in some cases they have then serious
excesses.

I come from a right-to-work state. If someone wants to join a union in my
state, they're free to do so, but they are not compelled to do so.

I think the key to unions is that any American has the right and privilege to
join a union but should never be forced to do so. And this latest ploy of the
Democrats of signing people up in the most willy-nilly fashion is something
that needs to be rejected, because it will not protect the rights of workers
who do not wish to join a union.


 I'm sorry, I didn't -- we're not hearing -- we're over in the cheap seats; we don't hear very well. (Laughter, applause.) 


 I agree with that, but I think we in Washington have an absolute requirement to bring health care costs down. I mentioned earlier the differential between Toyota and General Motors as far as the $1,700 worth -- worth $200. It's our responsibility to stop the cost aspects of health care, which is endangering the profitability and the competitiveness of our Detroit workers. 

So of course they have to do it on their own. But it is our job to create a
climate where we have both a safe and secure Social Security system but also
health care costs under control so that they can be competitive with foreign
products.

By the way, there are automobile manufacturers moving in the southern part of
this country, as you know, that are doing very well because American workers
are the most productive in the world.

And by the way, I have a glass of ethanol every morning before breakfast.
(Laughter.) But I still don't support the subsidies, and I don't think we need
them. And I think we ought to have sugarcane- based ethanol into this country,
and I don't think that subsidies are the answer, because I'll open up every
foreign market to our agricultural products, who are the most productive and
best and most effective agriculture in the world.

And all of this stuff about free trade -- my dear and beloved Ronald Reagan --
all this bashing of free trade -- he must spinning in his grave.


 Absolutely not, but I also want to point out this Internet child pornography is a terrible evil. It's got to be addressed. And everybody knows the way you stop it is go after the money. 


 (Off mike.) 


 I'm not -- don't have that kind of expertise to know exactly whether he has cut interest rates sufficiently or not, and that's why we've put that responsibility in the hands of the head of the Federal Reserve. 

I do know that this nation has faced some pretty good blows in the last month
or so with the credit crunch and the subprime lending. I'm glad that --
whenever they cut interest rates. I wish interest rates were zero. But we
leave those responsibilities to the smartest people we can find, and I think
that so far, he's done a good job.


 You don't want me then, pal. 


 I would establish an organization not unlike the OSS in World War II. People who are smart, people who are tough; people who are used to operating independently, and the smartest and most talented people I know. And I would let them loose, and I'd say find this guy and do whatever is necessary to get him. 

By the way, supporting the nominee to the party, of course I would support me.


 The president of France is a pro-American. I'm glad he's doing what he's doing, and it shows that if you live long enough anything is possible. (Laughter.) 


 I agree with the doctrine. 

And I'd also like to give President Bush a little credit, as we have this
discussion.

Right after 9/11, every expert in the world said there would be another attack
on the United States of America. There hasn't been.

Now, maybe that's all by accident. But if there had been, I think it's very
clear where the responsibility would have been placed. So I think we ought to
give him credit for that.

We went through the greatest reorganization of government since the creation
of the Defense Department and the creation of the Defense -- Department of
Homeland Security.

And America is safer. America is not safe; America is safer.


 I'd like to give the president some credit for that. 

Now, I strongly disagreed with the strategy employed by Secretary Rumsfeld.

And by the way, I'm the only one here that disagreed at the time, and I'm the
only one at the time that said we've got to employ a new strategy and outlined
what it was, which is the Petraeus strategy.

I said at the time I had no confidence in the then-secretary of defense.

But we are succeeding now in Iraq. And the fact is as we blame the president
for the failed strategy, we should give him credit for changing the strategy
and changing the leadership so that we now have I think one of the finest
military leaders in American history in David Petraeus.

So, look, I think we've got enormous challenges ahead of us. I think the
transcendent challenge of the 21st century is radical Islamic extremists.

And the way, I'd like to give my friend the mayor for the great job that he
did after 9/11 and the way that he and the president rallied this nation.


 But I know how to lead, I've been involved in these issues, and I know how to solve them. 


 Did you read mine? 

(LAUGHTER)

(CROSSTALK)


 The principles and philosophy that I hold, I have held since I raised my hand at age 17 as a midshipman at the United States Naval Academy to uphold this nation's honor; to serve it; call Americans to sacrifice and serve for their nation and defend the greatest nation in the history of the world. 

Now we need to restore trust and confidence in government. Now we are in a
titanic, transcendent struggle of the 21st century, which we have been
discussing earlier.


 I believe that for the last 20 years, I've been engaged in every major national security issue that has affected this nation. And I have been involved in many of the decisions as to how those are handled. 

And I again say that I'm glad to know that now everybody supported the surge.

I said at the time that General Petraeus and his strategy must be employed,
and I was criticized by Republicans at that time. And that was a low point,
but I stuck to it. I didn't change. I didn't say we needed a secret plan for
withdrawal.

I said that we can prevail, and as General Petraeus has said, this is the
central front in the battle against radical Islamic extremists. We are
succeeding.

And I will believe that if we had done what the Democrats had wanted to do, Al
Qaida would be trumpeting to the world that they defeated the United States of
America.

So my principles and my philosophy are those embodied in those words that we
believe that all of us are created equal and endowed by our creator with
certain inalienable rights.


 I will defend those. I believe in them. And I believe America's best days are ahead of us. 


 Now, tell me when people get sick where they come to to get health care. 

(CROSSTALK)


 Sure. And next year, if you continue 10 percent inflation associated with it, it'll be even further away. And the next year after that. 

Because the problem with health care in America, it's not the quality. It is
the inflation.

And in all due respect to your expert that we just saw, he's talking about the
wrong aspect of this issue. The right aspect of this issue is inflation, if we
could get it under control and get it reduced so that health care costs are
reasonable in America, then those people will be able to afford it.


 And they can -- and they will be able to go out and choose their insurer, anywhere in America, and they will be able to then to get affordable health care in America. 

But we have to make the recipient of the health care more responsible. We have
to have outcome-based results for health care. We have to emphasize wellness
and fitness.

One of the most disturbing things in America is the increase in diabetes,
obesity and high blood pressure amongst younger Americans. So we have to award
wellness and fitness.


 And that way, we'll have a healthier nation and we will have less health care costs. 

But, again, you made a statement about European nations, they all get health
care. Well, some people here in New Hampshire have been to Canada. I don't
think they want that system.


 I think that there's additional choice here: a choice of having outcome-based treatment. 


 There are five major diseases that consume 75 percent of health care costs in America. If someone has diabetes, we should give the health care provider a certain amount of money and say, "Care for that patient. And if, at the end of that period of time, and that patient is well, we'll give you a reward." Rather than every test, every procedure, every MRI. 

And we need walk-in clinics, and we need community health care, and we need
incentives for home health care as opposed to long-term care.

In my state of Arizona, we adopted a proposal which incentivizes health care
providers to keep people in home health care settings -- dramatically less
expensive than long-term care.

In Arizona, we have one-half the number, per capita, of people in long-term
care facilities as the state of Pennsylvania.

Incentives to keep costs down, Charlie. There are no incentives in the system
today.

Could I just mention one other thing? Both the attorney general of South
Carolina -- I don't know why I mention South Carolina...


 ... and the attorney general of Iowa -- and I don't -- well, anyway... 


 ... have sued the pharmaceutical companies because of overcharging of millions of dollars of Medicaid costs to their patients. 


 How could that happen? How could pharmaceutical companies be able to cover up the cost to the point where nobody knows? Why shouldn't we be able to reimport drugs from Canada? 

It's because of the power of the pharmaceutical companies. We should have
pharmaceutical companies competing to take care of our Medicare and Medicaid
patients.


 Well, they are. 


 Good evening, Scott. 


 I shouldn't have come back. 

(LAUGHTER)


 Sure. But the fact is that the American people have lost trust and confidence in government, and we have to secure the borders first. 


 I come from a border state. I've very aware of the challenges we face and the impact of illegal immigration. So, we will secure the borders first. As president, I will have the border state governors certify that those borders are secure. 

And, of course, in the course of our debates and discussions and -- with
Secretary Chertoff, he said that there's 2 million people who are in this
country illegally who have committed crimes. Those people have to be deported
immediately.

And I do believe we need a temporary worker program. One with an employee --
employment -- electronic employment verification system and tamper-proof
biometric documents, so that the only document and that system (inaudible) can
an employer legally hire somebody, and any employer who employs someone in any
other way will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.


 Now, I want to say again, this is a national security issue. We have to secure our borders. 

But I want to say again, these are God's children. We have to address it in as
humane and compassionate an issue as possible. But we have to respect our
nation's security requirements.

So I think that it's time Republican and Democrat sat down together and
resolved this issue. Because if you've got broken borders, and if you have 12
million people here illegally, then, obviously, you have de facto amnesty.

It is a federal responsibility. The federal government must act. I will act as
president.


 Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry, Charlie. 


 Scott, can I respond to that? 


 Let me just say, I've never supported amnesty. 

A few nights ago, Joe Lieberman and I had a town hall meeting together. It was
a rather unusual event. The issue came up. Joe Lieberman said, John McCain has
never supported amnesty, and anybody says that he does is a liar, is lying.

Now, no better authority than Governor Romney believed that it's not amnesty
because two years ago, he was asked, and he said that my plan was, quote,
"reasonable, and was not amnesty."

It's a matter of record.


 That's not true. That's not complete response to it. 

And, Governor Romney, it was explained to you and you said it was reasonable
and not amnesty. You can look it up.

(CROSSTALK)


 It provides for more than a penalty. 


 Sure. Fine, learn English, back of the line behind everybody else -- pretty much what Rudy just described. 


 So that we can address the issue. 


 It's not amnesty. And for you to describe it as you do in the attack ads, my friend, you can spend your whole fortune on these attack ads, but it will won't be true. 

(UNKNOWN): May I...


 Look, I don't... 


 There is no special right associated with my plan. 


 I said should they should not be in any way rewarded for illegal behavior. 


 They have to get in line behind everybody else. 


 Some of them are, some of them are not depending on their situation. 


 If a woman who has been here for eight years... 


 ... and has a son fighting in Iraq... 


 ... I'm not interesting in calling her up, calling up her son and telling I'm deporting his grandmother. 

This has to be...

(CROSSTALK)


 You're always misquoted. 


 When you change issues -- positions on issues from time to time, you will get misquoted. 

(LAUGHTER)


 I do, too. I do, too. 


 The answer is... 

(CROSSTALK)


 The answer is, we were still negotiating, we were debating, we were saying that some people have to go back to the country that they came from before they came here... 


 ... that some people have to go back. 

First, as Rudy said, we have to round up the 2 million who have committed
crimes and deport them immediately.


 And that is not amnesty for anyone. 


 (inaudible) that's not the plan. 


 I just wanted to say to Governor Romney, we disagree on a lot of issues, but I agree you are the candidate of change. 

(LAUGHTER)

But the difference I would have with Senator Obama has got to do with national
security.

I know Senator Obama and I've worked with him many times and I respect him, as
I respect Senator Clinton.

Senator Obama does not have the national security experience and background to
lead this nation.

We are facing the transcendent challenge of the 21st century. And that is
radical Islamic extremism.

In his recent statements on various foreign -- national security issues, I
have strongly disagreed.

But I am -- can make it perfectly clear that it requires a lot of knowledge
and a lot of experience and a lot of background to have the judgment to
address the challenges that our nation faces in the 21st century.


 This is an Iowa Democrat primary we're talking about. 


 At that price of oil, we're going to send $400 billion a year overseas to oil-producing countries. Some of that money will end up in the hands of terrorist organizations. It will certainly end up in the hands of dictators who do not have our interests or our values, and sometimes want to harm America. 

We have to reduce the dependence on foreign oil, and we have to eliminate --
we have to address the issue of greenhouse gas emissions.


 I think it's a nexus of two critical issues facing this country: alternate energy -- nuclear power, wind, solar, tide, hybrids. We have to unleash the technology of America -- and we must reduce and eventually eliminate this dependency on foreign oil, because it has become a national-security issue, and we have to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, because I believe there's enough evidence that we are going to damage this planet beyond repair unless we begin to address that issue. 




: I think the respect and commitment to the rights of the unborn is something I've fought for, and it has a lot to do with national security. Because it depends on—it says very much what kind of a country we are and our respect for human life, whether it be here in the United States or whether it be in China or Bangladesh or the Congo or anyplace else in the world. So I think it is connected. But I also firmly believe that the challenge of the 21st century is the struggle against radical Islamic extremism. It is a transcendent issue. It is hydra-headed. It will be with us for the rest of the century. 

I have served my nation and my country and the people of this country for all
of my adult life. I am the most prepared. I have been involved in these
issues. I have served this nation in the military and in the Congress, and I'm
the best prepared and equipped and need no on-the-job training to meet that
challenge.


: Of course. They are making progress, and we are winning on the ground. And there are political solutions being arrived at all over Iraq today, not at the national level. 

I'm disappointed, of course, that the Maliki government has not done what they
need to do. But I'll tell you, it's not only in the national interest of the
Iraqis, it's an American national interest. We are winning.

We must win. If we lose, there'll be catastrophic consequences and genocide,
and we will be back. This is a seminal moment in American history. We must
succeed.

There will be a big debate coming up in September on the floor of the Senate.
We will win that debate because the American people understand the
consequences of failure.


: Morale is good. Morale is good amongst our military. I can tell you that. 

A three-state solution—we just saw it when the Iraqi people joined together
with Iraqi flags celebrating a victory in a soccer match.

We are winning. We must win. And we will not set a date for surrender, as the
Democrats want us to do.v


 Have you forgotten about 9/11? 


 Have you forgotten about... 


: Let me just say, George, all of us feel frustration, sometimes anger and sorrow over what's happened in this war. 


: It was very badly mismanaged for nearly the first four years. I was one of the greatest critics. We do now have a strategy that is succeeding. We do have a military whose morale is up because they see this success. This has consequences far beyond Iraq, throughout the entire region. Look at the behavior of the Iranians, the Syria, the uneasiness of our so-called allies of the region. This is an historic moment in history. And I'm going to be judged by history, not by public opinion polls. And I believe that we can and must prevail, and we've got the strategy and the general that can do it. Give us some time for it to succeed. 

(APPLAUSE)


: We fail to appreciate that elections do not mean democracy, that it is rule of law. And rule of law, by the way, is beginning to take hold in Iraq, just as peaceful and more secure—more secure, not totally secure— neighborhoods in Baghdad and in Anbar and in other parts, in the Kurdish areas, is beginning to take place, which will then allow true democracy to take place. It's naive to say that we will never use nuclear weapons. It's naive to say we're going to attack Pakistan without thinking it through. What if Musharraf were removed from power? What if a radical Islamic government were to take place because we triggered it with an attack? But the fundamental—by the way, you quoted President Bush. President Kennedy also said at his inauguration that would go anywhere and bear any burden. I believe the reason why we won the Cold War and the reason why we are still a shining city on a hill is because of our advocacy and our dedication to the principles that all of us are created equal and endowed by our creator with certain inalienable rights. 


: That's all of us, no matter where we live in the world, no matter what our faith or our beliefs are. And I will continue to advocate for freedom and democracy and rights for all human beings. 

(APPLAUSE)


: We passed a $50 billion transportation bill that had $2 billion in pork barrel earmarked projects: $233 million for a bridge to nowhere in Alaska, to an island with 50 people on it. Not one dime in those pork barrel projects was for inspection or repair of bridges. 


: They were for pork barrel projects. I'll veto every single bill that comes across my desk and make the authors of those pork barrel projects... 


: Having been considered for that post several times, I've thought a lot about that. 

(LAUGHTER) The vice president really only has two duties. One is to cast a
tie-breaking vote in the case of a tied vote in the Senate. And the other is
to inquire daily as to the health of the president.

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE) I really would do what some presidents have done in the past. A
vice president brings a certain area of expertise and talent. I would probably
assign some of those areas, like telecommunications or some other important
issues. But...


: Look, I would be very careful that everybody understood that there's only one president. 

(APPLAUSE)


: I believe that we've got to simplify the tax code. But one of the first areas we've got to go after is the alternate minimum tax, which is going to eat in to 20 million American families if we don't eliminate it, and very quickly. Look, when we found out that Congress could not close a single military base when we had a huge number of them, we appointed—we passed a law where we appointed a commission and they said we would close so many based and Congress votes up or no—up or down. I would find Alan Greenspan. I'd say, "Give us your recommendations." We'll pass a law. And we will vote on Alan Greenspan and his commission's recommendations, yes or no, up or down. That's the way you're going to simplify the tax code, which now requires $140 billion of American families' income to prepare their tax returns. 

(APPLAUSE)


: You want my list? It's right here. 

(LAUGHTER) I would imagine that in 1967, in the USS Forrestal, where we'd just
had a horrendous fire and the ship was headed back to the United States, and a
guy came onboard and said, "We need people to go over to another aircraft
carrier and stay in combat," that was a very defining moment.


: I thought about that a lot in the intervening five and a half years in prison. The other mistake was when I went to a meeting among some regulators concerning a guy who was a supporter of mine. It was a mistake and one I never should have made. 


: I love my country. I've had the great honor for more than 50 years of serving it in the military, in Congress, the United States Senate. And I am fully prepared—fully prepared, more than anyone else running on either side—to fight the transcendent challenge of this nation, which will be for all of the 21st century. And that is the struggle against radical Islamic extremism. 


: We must win. We will win. And we will never surrender; they will. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I think it's pretty obvious that that statement was a paraphrase of Howard Dean's statement about the Democrat party. 

The fact is, I'm running on my record as a reliable conservative of 24 years.
And the indicators of that, obviously, is that I've fought wasteful spending,
I have had a strong and a long relationship on national security, I've been
involved in every national crisis that this nation has faced since Beirut, I
understand the issues, I understand and appreciate the enormity of the
challenge we face from radical Islamic extremism.

I am prepared. I am prepared. I need no on-the-job training.

I wasn't a mayor for a short period of time. I wasn't a governor for a short
period of time. For 20-some years, including leading the largest squadron in
the United States Navy, I led. I didn't manage for profit, I led for
patriotism.

(APPLAUSE)


 Because I don't think that's the time to call in the lawyers, when we're in a national security crisis. Those are the last people I'd call in. 

The people I'd call in, I'd call in my wisdom, my knowledge, my background, my
experience, and my ability to lead this nation.

Governor Romney, you've been spending the last year trying to fool people
about your record. You can't – I don't want you to start fooling them about
mine. I stand on my record. I stand on my record of a conservative – of a
conservative, and I don't think you can fool the American people. I think the
first thing you need is their respect, and I intend to earn their respect
because they may not agree with me on a couple of issues, but they'll know I'm
telling the truth, and what I believe and my steadfast positions on these
issues for more than 20 years, and I know that the transcendent challenge I
have the qualifications to lead, to grapple with and to emerge victorious.

I have those qualifications and I'm proud of them.

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, I don't change. I haven't changed. I think that anybody who is going to receive the nomination of their party obviously needs to appeal to and make their case to, but not pander to, all parts of the Republican Party. 

I'm proud that in my life I have engaged in reconciliation with former
enemies. I did that with the Vietnamese, who killed many of my friends. I did
that with other adversaries from time to time. And when Rev. Falwell came to
my office and said he wanted to put our differences behind us, I was more than
glad to.

And I'm even more glad today that I did. I believe in reconciliation. I
believe that they're an important part of our party.


 I think we need to move together. We need all of us to win this election, and I think it's going to take a united party to do so. 

And I hope that all elements of our party will respect the process and support
the nominee of our party.

(APPLAUSE)


 First of all, I think it is important that that will be one of the defining issues of this campaign, because we know that there will be Hillary-care resurrected. There will be efforts to raise your taxes. There will be efforts to have a single-payer big government solution by the Democrats. They've already espoused those causes. If you believe them, please take a trip to Canada or England before you decide to support such a thing. 

(APPLAUSE)

America has the highest quality health care in the world. Our job is to
preserve it. Our job is to keep the costs down. Last year, the Medicaid
inflation was 10 percent. No, no program in the world can survive under that.
So of course we want to remove the employer (OOTC:EPLI) tax, and tax
incentives, and move it to the individual. Give the individual a $2,500
refundable tax credit, a family a $5,000 tax credit.


 If you need to have people in special categories such as congenital diseases, we may have to set up a fund to care for those. But the key is, make health care in America affordable and available. Don't destroy it, as the Democrats want to do. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I don't know. And I can't be concerned. Because I know too many brave young Americans that are serving and sacrificing in Iraq, as we speak. 

(APPLAUSE)

I would much rather lose a campaign than lose a war. And now I'm...

(APPLAUSE)

Let me just say that I know and respect Senator Clinton.


 The debate that I have between me and her will be based on national security, on fiscal conservatism, and on social conservatism. It will be a respectful debate. That is what the American people want. 

Now, one of them will be spending. I have fought against out-of- control and
disgraceful spending that's been going on and I have saved the American people
as much as $2 billion at one stroke.

In case you missed it, a few days ago, Senator Clinton tried to spend $1
million on the Woodstock Concert Museum. Now, my friends, I wasn't there. I'm
sure it was a cultural and pharmaceutical event.

(LAUGHTER)

I was tied up at the time.

(LAUGHTER)

But the fact is...

(APPLAUSE)


 My friends, no one can be president of the United States that supports projects such as these. And I believe that wasteful spending has got to be eliminated. And I will have this debate and win because she is a liberal Democrat and I am a proud, reliable, consistent conservative Republican. That's why I'll win. 

(APPLAUSE)


 First of all, I'm glad they're not dying at 67, Governor. 

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)

Pleased to know that.

Look, what Americans need is some straight talk. They need to know -- every
man, woman and child in America needs to know that both of these are going
broke. They're going broke and we've got to do the hard things.

We've got to fix it for the future generations of Americans. Don't we owe that
to young Americans today? I say we do.

(APPLAUSE)

And you can do it with a couple of charts. One of them, on Social Security, is
you can show them how much money is going out, how much is going in and when
there's no money left.

And then you look at a model for that, and that took place in 1983 The last
time Social Security was in serious trouble, a liberal Democrat named Tip
O'Neill and Ronald Reagan stood together in the Rose Garden and they fixed
Social Security.


 Yes, of course, and we never proposed amnesty. But you know, this whole debate...


 You know, this whole debate saddens me a little bit because we do have a serious situation in America. In 1986, we passed a law that said we would enforce our borders, and gave amnesty to a couple of million people. We gave the amnesty. Now we have 12 million people and still borders that are not enforced.

I came to the Senate not to do the easy things, but to do the hard things. Mel
Martinez and I knew this was going to be a tough issue, but we thought the
status quo was unacceptable: broken borders; 12 million people here illegally;
a need for a temporary worker program, certainly in my state in the
agricultural section, certainly in this state of Florida.

And we tried to get something done. We said we'd enforce the borders. The
American people didn't believe us. They don't believe us because of our
failure in Katrina, our failure in Iraq, our failures in reining in corruption
and out of control spending.

So we tried and we failed. And I appreciate the president's efforts. He comes
from a border state too. And what we've learned is that the American people
want the borders enforced. We must enforce the -- secure the borders first.

But then you've still got two other aspects of this issue that have to be
resolved as well. And we need to sit down as Americans and recognize these are
God's children as well.

(Applause)

And they need some protection under the law. And they need some of our love
and compassion.


 And I want to assure you that I'll enforce the borders first, that as president of the United States, we'll solve this immigration problem. And we won't demagogue it. And we won't have sanctuary cities.


 And we won't have all this other rhetoric that unfortunately contributes nothing to the national dialogue.


 Absolutely. Absolutely.

When we came to power in 1994, the government ...

(Applause)

... changed government and the government changed us.

We let spending lurch completely out of control. We spent $3 million to study
the DNA of bears in Montana -- I don't know if that was a paternity issue or a
criminal issue.

(Laughter)

We presided over a great expansion of government, the latest being the SCHIP,
which was going to be paid for, supposedly, with a dollar-a-pack in increase
in the tax on a pack of cigarettes.

So, we're going to help children with their health insurance and hope that
they continue to smoke.

(Laughter)

So, I have the record of fighting against wasteful spending. I have a clear
record of winning. I saved the taxpayers $2 billion on a bogus Air Force
Boeing tanker deal, where people went to jail.

I led in the Abramoff hearings in the -- in the obscure Indian Affairs
Committee, for which people are still testifying and going to jail.

As president of the United States, I'd take an old veto pen that Ronald Reagan
gave me, and I'd veto every single pork barrel bill that comes across my
death. I'd make the authors famous.

And we've got to stop it and stop it now. And I can do it. And I've done it.
And I've got the record.

(Applause)

And I know how Washington works. And I look forward to it.


 I do not, and I think we should look very carefully at it. And I think we should look very carefully at some of the provisions, which according to The Wall Street Journal would increase an individual's tax rate up into the 30s.

Obviously, we need a simpler, fairer tax code. Everybody knows that. We need
to have a commission that reports out a credible proposal. And then we do what
we do with the base closing commissions. Congress can't fool around, they
either vote yes or no.

If Congress can't fix the tax code, give me the job and I'll fix it.

I just want to also say that Congressman Paul, I've heard him now in many
debates talk about bringing our troops home, and about the war in Iraq and how
it's failed.

(Applause)

And I want to tell you that that kind of isolationism, sir, is what caused
World War II. We allowed...

(Applause)

We allowed ...

(Audience booing)


 We allowed -- we allowed Hitler to come to power with that kind of attitude of isolationism and appeasement.

(Audience booing)

And I want to tell you something, sir. I just finished having Thanksgiving
with the troops, and their message to you is -- the message of these brave men
and women who are serving over there is, "Let us win. Let us...

(Applause)


 I have a 24-year record of opposing tax increases and supporting tax reductions. And, no, I'm like Fred. My pledge and my record is up to the American people, not up to any other organization.


 For a long time I used a lot of guns, including carrying a .45 as a pilot flying in combat over Vietnam.

I know how to use guns. I don't own one now.


 There's a lot at stake here, my friends, and thank God for the young men and women who are sending the message I repeat to you again, after having been there over Thanksgiving weekend, let me win, let us win.

(Applause)


 Well, governor, I'm astonished that you haven't found out what waterboarding is.


 Then I am astonished that you would think such a -- such a torture would be inflicted on anyone in our -- who we are held captive and anyone could believe that that's not torture. It's in violation of the Geneva Convention. It's in violation of existing law...

(Applause)

And, governor, let me tell you, if we're going to get the high ground in this
world and we're going to be the America that we have cherished and loved for
more than 200 years. We're not going to torture people.

We're not going to do what Pol Pot did. We're not going to do what's being
done to Burmese monks as we speak. I suggest that you talk to retired military
officers and active duty military officers like Colin Powell and others, and
how in the world anybody could think that that kind of thing could be
inflicted by Americans on people who are held in our custody is absolutely
beyond me.


 Well, then you would have to advocate that we withdraw from the Geneva Conventions, which were for the treatment of people who were held prisoners, whether they be illegal combatants or regular prisoners of war. Because it's clear the definition of torture. It's in violation of laws we have passed.

And again, I would hope that we would understand, my friends, that life is not
"24" and Jack Bauer.

Life is interrogation techniques which are humane and yet effective. And I
just came back from visiting a prison in Iraq. The Army general there said
that techniques under the Army Field Manual are working and working
effectively, and he didn't think they need to do anything else.

My friends, this is what America is all about. This is a defining issue and,
clearly, we should be able, if we want to be commander in chief of the U.S.
Armed Forces, to take a definite and positive position on, and that is, we
will never allow torture to take place in the United States of America.

(Applause)


 Well, let me remind you, Congressman, we never lost a battle in Vietnam. It was American public opinion that forced us to lose that conflict.

(Applause)

I think it's important for all Americans to understand the fundamental
difference. After we left Vietnam, they didn't want to follow us home. They
wanted to build their own workers' paradise. If you read Zarqawi, if you read
bin Laden, if you read Zawahiri, read what they say. They want to follow us
home. They want Iraq to be a base for Al Qaida to launch attacks against the
United States. Their ultimate destination is not Iraq.

Their ultimate destination is New York City, Washington, D.C., Chicago and
Phoenix, Arizona. This is a transcendent challenge of our time.

(Audience booing)


 I believe that we can meet it and we will defeat it.

(Applause)


 Look, I am going to give you some straight talk. This president came to office in a time of peace, and then we found ourselves in 2001.

And he did not have as much national security experience as I do. So he had to
rely more on the vice president of the United States, and that's obvious. I
wouldn't have to do that. I might have to rely on a vice president that I
select on some other issues. He may have more expertise in telecommunications,
on information technology, which is the future of this nation's economy. He
may have more expertise in a lot of areas.

But I would rely on a vice president of the United States -- but was Fred
said, the primary responsibility is to select one who will immediately take
your place is necessary. But the vice president of the United States is a key
and important issue, and must add in carrying out the responsibilities of the
president of the United States.


 General, I thank you for your service to our nation. I respect it. All the time, I talk to our military leaders, beginning with our joint chiefs of staff and the leaders in the field, such as General Petraeus and General Odierno and others who are designated leaders with the responsibility of the safety of the men and women under their command and their security and protect them as best they can.

Almost unanimously, they tell me that this present policy is working, that we
have the best military in history, that we have the bravest, most
professional, best prepared, and that this policy ought to be continued
because it's working.


 First thing I'll do, my friends, is take out my veto pen and veto every single pork-barrel project that comes across my desk, and there will be no more bridges to nowhere under my administration, I promise you that. And we'll give the president of the United States the line-item veto which Rudy Giuliani opposed so that he could protect his $250 million worth of pork.

My friends, we will take the money and give it back to the states and we'll
let them make these decisions, but we'll never have another pork barrel
project as long as I'm capable of wielding a veto pen.


 The line-item veto is constitutional.


 Of course, any nation that no longer has economic strength sooner or later will lose its military strength, so it's a national security issue. We have many trillions of dollars of unfunded liability. Obviously, we've been on a spending spree. We cannot increase taxes. If oil reaches $100 a barrel, which many people think it may, $400 billion of the American treasury will go to oil-producing countries. Some of those monies will go to terrorist organizations. We have got to achieve energy independence, oil independence in this nation. I will make it a Manhattan project, and we will, in five years, become oil independent.


 I'm happy to say low-income Americans except for payroll taxes don't pay taxes, but we've got to reform the tax code. Nobody understands it, nobody trusts it, nobody believes in it, and we have to fix it. And we can't raise taxes as our Democrat friends want. So I don't know exactly who's paying the most of the burden, but I would say that the American people need a tax code they can understand and that they know is fair.


 Thank you. I've devoted my life in uniform and in public office to keeping this nation safe. I've been involved in every major national security issue of our time. That kind of experience is what's given me judgment: the judgment to oppose a failed strategy in Iraq, a judgment to call for the strategy that's succeeding now. And I wasn't very popular because of it. I have the judgment and the experience, and I believe that I can ask every American to serve. I have one guiding principle, one ambition, and that is to keep America safe and to achieve and maintain our greatness.


 Well, obviously, we should make sure that every nation respects human rights, and we should advocate that and try to enforce it. But I will open every market in the world to Iowa's agricultural products. I'm the biggest free marketer and free trader that you will ever see. And I will also eliminate subsidies on ethanol and other agricultural products. They are n impediment to competition. They are an impediment to free markets. And I believe that subsidies are a mistake. And I don't believe that anybody can stand here and say that they're a fiscal conservative and yet support subsidies which distort markets and destroy our ability to compete in the world and destroy our ability to get cheaper products into the United States of America.


 I've been involved in this issue since the year 2000. I have had hearings. I've traveled the world. I know that climate change is real. But let me put it to you this way. Suppose that climate change is not real and all we do is adopt green technologies, which our economy and technology is perfectly capable of. Then all we've done is given our kids a cleaner world. But suppose they're wrong. Suppose they're wrong and climate change is real and we've done nothing? What kind of a planet are we going to pass on to the next generation of Americans? It's real. We've got to address it. We can do it with technology with cap and trade, with capitalist and free enterprise motivation. And I'm confident that we can pass on to our children and grandchildren a cleaner, better world.


 The answer to the problem in education in America is simple. We need more choice and more competition. Entrance by a good student into college today, they have a number of choices and people are seeking them to be part of those educational institutions. We don't have the choice in competition we needed in K-12. We need more charter schools. We need vouchers where it's approved by the local state and school boards. We need to have, clearly, home schooling, if people want that. We need to reward good teachers and find bad teachers another line of work. We need to have all of these compete. In my home state of Arizona, we have charter schools. Some have failed. But they're competing with the public schools, and the level of education is increasing. In New York City today, there's a remarkable thing happening under Mayor Bloomberg and Joel Klein who have done marvelous work with an educational system that was clearly broken. Those can be examples of a way to improve education in America and provide choice in competition and give every American family the same choice I and my family had, and that is to send our child to the school of our choice.


 Our first obligation and my qualifications lend to making America safe. We must make America safe. This is a military, diplomatic, intelligence, and cyberspace challenge. And I have the credentials and the knowledge and the background and the judgment to do that. The second most important thing if we're going to complete that laundry list is restore trust and confidence in government. There is none today. We have to fix Medicare. We have to stop this wasteful pork barrel spending that has led to corruption in Washington. Of course, we have to fix our borders. We have to sit down together and fix Medicare and Social Security. I can lead. I can inspire confidence and restore trust and confidence in their government again. That's the key to any success we want to achieve.


 I think the hardest thing in this age of struggle against radical Islamic extremism is balancing the rights of everyone's privacy, plus our ability to combat this great evil of radical Islamic extremism. And that's why I think there has to be the participation of the courts, the legislature, the executive branch, and the American people to what measures we take.


 I cannot think of a time and I hope I can never think of a time because I came to Washington because I had a set of principles and ideals. But at the same time I have more legislative achievements than anybody on this stage by far. I have joined together across the aisle on an umber of pieces of legislation, many of them very important. I'm proud of my legislative record of conserving my ideals and my conservative principles and getting things done in Washington. And I am proud of that, and I will continue to hold to those ideals. But I will reach across the aisle to the Democrats who I have worked with, who know me, and we know we can work together for the good of this country.


 Let's raise the level of dialogue and discussion and debate in this campaign. Let's not accuse each other of a lack of patriotism or a lack of character. There are different views on differing issues. There are differences in experience. There are differences in experience.


 But I think we should all be respectful of one another, and the American people, I think, will benefit from it.


 Well, you know, when I first came to Congress, we were in the middle of the Reagan revolution, and I was proud to be a foot soldier in that revolution. And we cut taxes.

But we cut spending. And Ronald Reagan insisted that we cut spending, because
he knew that it was vital, if we were going to keep the deficit down and not
have the fiscal difficulties we have today, we had to cut spending.

I'm proud to have supported those tax cuts. And, as a matter of fact,
interestingly, I'm proud to have the support of Gramm and Rudman, which were
the spending cut limits, Jack Kemp, who has announced today that he's
supporting me, a supply-sider.

And I believe that if we had done what I wanted to do -- and that's cut taxes
and, at the same time, cut spending -- we'd be talking about more tax cuts
today. But we let spending get out of control.

And we know what happened. We lost our election; we lost our way; and we
allowed the deficits to go up. And, unfortunately, we have allowed us to
betray some of the principles -- one of the principles of the Republican
Party.


 I'm in favor of tax cuts. We'll do them. But we'll cut spending when I'm president of the United States.


 Well, I -- and when we see what happened to spending and we have a bridge to nowhere of $233 million to an island with 50 people on it and we have former members of Congress who are now residing in federal prison because of the spending and corruption, my friend, we have to, if we're going to restore the confidence of the American people and our Republican base first, we're going to have to cut the spending, we're going to have to eliminate the pork barrel and wasteful spending.

And I'm proud to tell you, Chris, in 24 years as a member of Congress, I have
never asked for nor received a single earmark or pork barrel project for my
state and I guarantee you I'll veto those bills. I'll ask for the line item
veto and I'll veto them and I'll make the authors of them famous.

And we'll get spending under control and then we'll be able to have some
physical sanity and restore trust and confidence on the part of the American
people.


 Oh, sure. Look, ask Jack Abramoff, who's in prison today, a guy who was a corrupt lobbyist and his friends, if I haven't cut spending. Ask the Air Force and Boeing, where I saved $2 billion, $2 billion by fighting against a bonus Air Force tanker deal.

Ask the chairman of the Appropriations Committee, who calls me "the sheriff,"
the millions and millions of dollars that I've fought against and kept out of
these appropriations bills.

I think it was the reason why I wasn't elected Miss Congeniality in the United
States Senate. I have a record of saving billions for the American taxpayers.


 Could we just weigh in on this for just a…


 Yes, look, I admire Fred's courage. I admire a lot of people who have put forth proposals, especially the president of the United States.

After he won re-election in 2004, he went out there and tried to tell the
American people that this system is going broke, and I admire him for it.

Look, what we're going to have to do is what we did in 1983, when Ronald
Reagan and Tip O'Neill, armed with a study by Alan Greenspan, stood in the
Rose Garden together and said, "We're going to fix Social Security," and we
did.

And it's been a long time since 1983. And it's time we sat down together,
Republican and Democrat, and, as Fred said, tell the American people it's
broken and it's got to be fixed, because we have that obligation to the next
generation of young Americans.

That's our obligation to them. And for us to just sit there and have these
young people paying into the system and not going to get anything out of it,
obviously, is an abrogation of our responsibilities.


 I know that I have been an agent of change. I'm proud to have been one of those who played a key role in bringing about one of the most important changes in recent years and that was the change in strategy from a failing strategy in Iraq pursued by Secretary Rumsfeld, which was needlessly causing the sacrifice of our most precious American treasure.

And I and several others fought for this change in strategy, said we had no
confidence in the then secretary of defense, Secretary Rumsfeld, and this
change has had enormous benefit to America, to our security and to our future.

And I am convinced, when you saw today an American Al Qaida who is dedicated
to the destruction of the United States of America, when you saw Osama Bin
Laden in the last two weeks with messages, one of them directly to the Sunni
in Baghdad and Anbar Province, to tell them to turn against the Americans, I
believe that -- I know that strategy is working.

I know it's the greatest change -- I don't know of a better change than saving
American lives and, of course, I've been an agent of other change. Some people
don't agree with campaign finance reform. That was a change. Some people don't
agree with the line item veto when we passed. That was a change.

I have been an agent of change in Washington. I know how the system works.


 I know how to nail down the people that want to charge the American people $2 billion extra for an Air Force tanker.

And I know how to bring about change, and I know how to go after them. And
I've done that.

But I'm very proud -- I'm very proud of the change in Iraq that has saved
young Americans' lives. And I can't imagine and I can't be prouder of being
that kind of an agent of change.


 All I can say is that I also had experience in leadership, not in management. I led the largest squadron in the United States Navy, not for profit, but for patriotism. I'm proud of that record of leadership.

And I also have the broad-based experience, and knowledge, and background to
make decisions over the major national security challenges that have faced
this nation over the last 20 years. I've been involved in literally every one
of them.

And I had the foresight to know what needs to be done in Iraq. I was involved
in every one of these other issues.

So the American people want change. I know that I can do the things and have
done the things they wanted done.

But they also want America secure. And I've spent my life in defending this
nation and making it secure. And I know how that has to be done, and I know
how to meet the transcendent challenge of the 21st century.

We're in two wars. And we're in a struggle against radical Islamic extremism.
We've seen the manifestations of that today. That young man that tore up his
passport, some day he's going to wish that he had never done that.

And Osama bin Laden, I know how to get him, and I will get him. And that's the
kind of experience and leadership and the change that the American people also
want…


 Is my green light still on?

(CROSSTALK)


 Well, first of all, could I comment, maybe we haven't always gotten the best result from those, quote, "governors," depending on which one you look at.

Second of all, then-Governor Reagan fought communism for 30 years. He traveled
over 60 countries in the world. He had been a special envoy president, so he
knew national security policy. And it's very clear to most observers that you
need to have the knowledge and the background and particularly in this complex
world and the complex challenges we face.

I know Musharraf. Pakistan was off the radar until these things happened. I
know how to deal with Pakistan. I've been to Waziristan. I know these issue
and I've been involved in them for the last 20 years.

I haven't always agreed with the administration. I opposed sending the Marines
to Beirut.

It's important to know the players, know the issues and have the knowledge and
background in order to address them, and I will leave that to the judgment of
the American people as to whether they think that that is important in these
very, very challenging times.


 Well, it means that I never heard him criticize the Rumsfeld strategy. I did not hear him support the strategy that we are now employing, and in a previous debate he said it was apparently working, when it was clear, to those of us who know Iraq, those who know the situation on the ground, that it was working.

But, look, we'll have these differences and I hope that the American people
will judge me on my merits and my experience and that's what I'm running for
president on.


 Damn good job.


 Do say it again. It was very nice.


 Sure.


 By giving us a human intelligence capability and by making it the top priority for all of the agencies of government and improving our intelligence capability dramatically, which is very badly needed right now.

But I want to -- since you mentioned my name, about Senate versus governor.
It's not an accident that I received the endorsement of four former
secretaries of state, Henry Kissinger, George Shultz, Larry Eagleburger, and
Al Haig. It's not an accident that over 100 retired admirals and generals have
endorsed my candidacy. But more important, it isn't my Senate experience that
I rely on, Chris. It's my life experience. It's my time deprived of America,
when I really grew to love her.

It's my experience in leading men and women into combat -- certainly, not into
combat, leading men and women, as a commanding officer of a squadron in the
United States Navy, of having the life experiences that has given me an
experience that has probably been more meaningful and more helpful to my
service to this country than perhaps my time in the United States Senate.


 Well, first of all, the C visa, as Governor Romney refers to, was an earned right, not an automatic one. Two million people that Secretary Chertoff has said are in this country illegally have to be rounded up and deported immediately.

So, certainly, amnesty for all or even citizenship for all was not allowed.

Second of all, you had to have a job. You had to go through the naturalization
process. You had to pay a fine. You had to do many things.

And during this debate and discussion, we talked about different -- because it
ended up not leaving the floor of the Senate -- about this touchback provision
for some.

But, look, we all know the debate has gone on about who wants, quote,
"amnesty" and, of course, I have never ever supported amnesty and never will.
But the point is we've got to work together and move forward and solve this
problem.

Our borders are broken. We have to fix them and that's our first priority and
as president, I will secure our borders and I will have the governors of
border states certify those borders are secure. Then we move on to the ways
that we discussed last night, a temporary worker program that works,
addressing the issue of the people who are here illegally in a humane fashion.

I'm not interested in calling up a mother of a son or a daughter who's
fighting in Iraq and telling them, I'm not interested in calling the son or
daughter in Iraq and telling them I'm deporting their mother.

We've got to address this issue in a humane and compassionate fashion. We've
got to have national security first, which means secure our borders, and then
we move forward together on this issue. That's the way we're going to resolve
the issue of illegal immigration in America and American people want the
borders secured first, but Americans are compassionate and loving and caring
people and they will address it, I believe, in that fashion.


 In 2005, not that along ago -- I think it was 2005 -- Governor Romney, when told about the plan, said it was reasonable and, quote, "not amnesty." We need to get beyond this. We need to sit down together and work this out, and we have to figure out a way of addressing the issue of the other 10 million.

By the way, it was Secretary Chertoff who said there's 2 million who have
committed crimes in this country and we have to get them out of this country.
And of course it's not automatic. They have to do many things in order to
qualify, and it's an earned ability to do so.

Many will be deported, unfortunately, or fortunately, depending on how you
look at it, but, again, instead of fighting about who's for this and who's for
that, we have a national security challenge. We have an issue that's de facto
amnesty because of the 12 million people that are still here illegally. And we
need to sit down together and in the kind of conversation the rest of us had
last night about how we can come up with a real solution and address it and
address it in a way that we can be proud of at the end of the day.


 It didn't do him a lot of good.


 Look, these are attack ads. I don't think they work. But I'm running a positive campaign. I wish you'd have shown one of mine. They're worth millions.


 So, look, I'm running for president because I want to lead this country, and I believe I have the experience and knowledge and background. We're running -- basically, we responded once.

But, look, the message that we're trying to give, and I will continue to give,
is why I'm qualified to lead. And people in New Hampshire, the town hall
meetings, the interfacing we've had with them, is what's been wonderful for
me.

It's been the greatest experience of my life now to have a second opportunity
to come before the people of New Hampshire. And I think they'll judge us
overall by the kind of campaign we run.


 Obviously, since I didn't come in even second -- by the way, I'm demanding a recount with Senator Thompson.

(CROSSTALK)


 But I still think that was a bad count. I think there were some hanging chads there.

Look, everybody runs their own campaigns. The people make the judgment. We
respond. But, look, politics isn't beanbag, and we're moving on.


 Is that Chuck Norris that's…


 Please elect me for eight years, I'm not sure that's a vote getter.

(END VIDEO CLIP)


 I'm not sure it's a vote getter. Hey, I'm running for an eight-year term? I don't think most people would take that very well -- make that welcome. What happens…


 Sure.


 No, because I think then you're the lame duck, you're quacking on Inauguration Day. But look, I would point out that when Ronald Reagan won the Cold War, he was in his second term older than me. I think that's pretty good, isn't it?

Look, I've got the vigor. I've been -- everybody has seen me here on the
campaign trail. We work 16, 18 hours a day.

It's exhilarating, I am excited. And I'm sure that anybody who looks at my
schedule, both in the Senate, but mostly on the campaign trail, I think they
would be very pleased. And look, I am older than dirt. I've got more scars
than Frankenstein, but I've learned a lot of things along the way.


 My 95-year-old mother.


 Thank you.


 I believe America is -- the greatest days are ahead of us. And I think at this time, though, we need leadership.

And I think I bring the experience and the knowledge in order to make the
judgments that are necessary as we face these transcendent challenges.

We're in two wars. We face the threat of radical Islamic extremism. We also
have to restore trust and confidence in government that's been badly eroded.

And we're going to have to do some work to re-energize our Republican base.
And I can do that, too, as well as reach out to independents. My ambition is
to make this country safe and keep our future secure.

And I'd like to thank the people of New Hampshire for this wonderful
experience. Thank you so much for being part of this incredible process called
democracy. And this is what it's all about.

Thank you.


 One of the reasons why I won in New Hampshire is because I went there and told them the truth. And sometimes you have to tell people things they don't want to hear, along with things that they do want to hear. 

There are jobs -- let's have a little straight talk -- there are some jobs
that aren't coming back to Michigan. There are some jobs that won't come back
here to South Carolina.

But we're going to take care of them. That's our goal; that's our obligation.

We need to go to the community colleges and design education and training
programs so that these workers get a second chance. That's our obligation as a
nation.

We're not going to end somebody's career and life of productivity at age 35 or
40 or older. We're going to design education and training programs that meet
the needs of this information technology revolution that we are in.

And by the way, I don't believe we're headed into a recession. I believe the
fundamentals of this economy are strong, and I believe they will remain
strong. This is a rough patch, but I think America's greatness lies ahead of
us.


 Well, the first thing we need to do is stop the out-of- control spending. Out-of-control spending is what caused the interest rates to rise. It causes people to be less able to afford to own their own homes. 

We need to stop the spending. And that way we can get our budget under control
and we can have a -- basically a strong, fundamental fiscal underpinnings.

The second thing that we need to do, of course, is stop spending $400 billion
a year overseas to oil-producing countries that come right out of our economy
immediately. Some of that money goes, unfortunately, to fund terrorist
organizations.

We've got to -- and we can use Detroit for this, where there's tremendous
technology in the state of Michigan, and tremendous abilities to develop
technologies to reduce this dependency on foreign oil, and eventually
eliminate it, and stop this outflow of some $400 billion a year. Education and
training is obviously important, but stop the spending. As president, I know
how to do it. I'll wield that veto pen, and I won't let another pork-barrel
earmark spending bill cross my desk without vetoing it. And I'll make the
authors of it famous.

I know how to do it. I saved the taxpayers $6 billion on a bogus tanker deal.
I'm called the sheriff by my friends in the Senate who are the appropriators,
and I didn't win Miss Congeniality. And as president, I won't win Miss
Congeniality, either.

I'll stop the outrageous spending, and that'll be the best thing that can
happen to America's economy.


 I think they stimulate the economy. I think that one of the first things we have to do that I forgot to mention is make these tax cuts permanent, because we've got to give some certainty to families and businesses all over America that these tax cuts will not expire and then give them the effect of a tax increase. So I believe they stimulate the economy, but, Chris, you've got to cut spending. 

I'm proud to have been a member of the Reagan revolution, a foot soldier. And
we cut taxes, but Ronald pay Reagan knew we had to cut spending at the same
time. And that was our great failure as a party, is we cut taxes and then we
let spending get out of control.

And frankly, it cost us a great deal. If we had adopted the tax cut package
that I had, which entails spending cuts, then we would be talking about more
tax cuts today.


 I think, in some respects, that the Reagan principles and philosophy and practices we've gone away from. I've said a number of times we came to power in 1994 to change government, and government changed us. Spending was one of those. 

There's probably not a Republican in this room that doesn't know what I'm
saying when I say the bridge to nowhere, the $233 million bridge to an island
with 50 people on it.

So I say that we let spending get out of control. We abandoned some of our
environmental principles that Teddy Roosevelt was so famous for.

Climate change, in my view, is probably real, and climate change has to be
addressed, and we can do it without asking anyone to shiver in the dark. Young
people in this country want a better planet to be handed off to them.

But fundamentally, also, we have to return to those principles of less
government, lower taxes, strong family values, strong national defense, and
those that made us the Reagan revolution that brought about a new dawn of a
new day in America and helped us immeasurably in bringing down the iron
curtain.

And I'm not sure about the lights here.


 I would have placed my confidence in the captains of those ships? 


 If I'd have been the captain of the ship, I probably would have assessed the situation as it was at the time. And for those of us who are not in that situation to second guess is a little bit presumptuous. It's a long, hard process to become the commander of a Navy ship. These are the most professional and well trained and capable people in the world. 

And since our beginning days as an independent nation, we've had conflicts
over the issue of freedom of the seas, dating back to the Barbary pirates,
dating back to World War I when German u-boats were sinking U.S. maritime
ships, to the outbreak of -- led to the outbreak of World War II, as well.


 I agree with Rudy. Maybe the Iranians think we're weaker because of the NIE. Maybe the Iranians aren't really slowing their export of most lethal explosive devices into Iraq. 

And I believe the president of the United States made the right statement. He
told them that we will preserve the fundamental principle of freedom of the
sea, and he will do what's necessary in order to preserve it.

So I believe these people -- these commanding officers made the right
decision, and I believe that we entrusted their ships and the lives of the
people under them in the most appropriate fashion.

But don't think that this wasn't a serious situation of the utmost seriousness
in one of the most important waterways in the world, because of so much of the
world's oil goes through there.

The Iranians better understand that the United States will stick to its many
years-long tradition of preserving the fundamental principle of freedom of the
seas.


 Can the Democrats win an election when they continue to deny the facts on the ground that we are succeeding? Can the Democrats deny that casualties have come down, that the provinces like Anbar are peaceful, that Baghdad, on New Year's Eve, thousands of people poured out in the streets to celebrate the new year? 

Can Senator Clinton retract her statement to General Petraeus when she said
she would have to suspend disbelief in order to believe that the surge was
working? In fact, you would have to suspend disbelief that it's not working.
And I say every time that I'm at a town hall meeting, al Qaeda's on the run,
but they're not defeated.

Today is a historic day, my friends. Today is the day that the president of
the United States announced the change in strategy, the so-called surge.

I supported that, I argued for it. I'm the only one on this stage that did.
And I condemn the Rumsfeld strategy before that.

And I'm telling you, it's succeeding. And these young people are going to come
home. But it's not going to be decided by any politician in Washington.

It's going to be decided by the man that should have been "TIME" magazine man
of the year, General David Petraeus. That's who should decide when American
troops come home.

(APPLAUSE)


 And I am convinced that if we continue this successful path, Americans will be able to come home. But the most important thing, there will be a reduction in casualties. And we can win, and then these young people will come home and they will come home with honor. 


 Not at the time. 


 My point was that I condemned the Rumsfeld strategy and called for the change in strategy. That's the difference. 


 Could I just make a comment? I'm not interested in trading with Al Qaida. All they want to trade is burkas. I don't want to travel with them. They like one-way tickets. 

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)


 I guess, very briefly, it's not American casualties. It's American presence -- I mean, not American presence. It's American casualties. We've been in South Korea for 50 years. We've been in Japan and Germany since the end of World War II. We're in Kuwait. 

It's up to the Iraqi government and the United States government. Anybody who
thinks it's the length of time we're there that matters, it's American
casualties that matter and those casualties have been dramatically reduced,
thanks to these brave and courageous young men and women who we should be
supporting and not condemning what they're doing.

(APPLAUSE)


 I think my answer is pretty obvious. 

(LAUGHTER)


 I have been one of those involved in one of the most important changes that could have ever made, and that is reverse a losing strategy in Iraq which would have entailed the loss of so much and so much sacrifice of American treasure. And now we have a new strategy, and we are succeeding. 

If we would have done what the Democrats had wanted to do six months ago, al
Qaeda would be trumpeting to the world that they beat us. I'll never let that
happen. We'll never surrender.

I've brought about change in spending practices. The chairman of the
Appropriations Committee called me the sheriff.

I have saved $6 billion on a deal for an Air Force tanker that was a terrible
rip-off of the taxpayers which wouldn't have happened if it hadn't been for
me.

Ask Jack Abramoff if I'm an insider in Washington. You would probably have to
go during visiting hours in the prison. And he will tell you, and his lobbyist
cronies, of the change I made there.

And also, I think it's important to know that I have never asked for or
received a pork barrel project or earmark for my state. But I have known how
to change things. And we have changed a lot of things. And we will change more
things.

And, if I can change the things that I was able to as a senator, I'm looking
forward to the changes that I can make when I'm the president of the United
States.

(APPLAUSE)


 I have the greatest respect and affection for the mayor of New York. My point is that I've been involved in every major national security challenge for the last 20 years and before that, I fought in some of them. 

The fact is that I have led the largest squadron in the United States Navy,
not for profit, but for patriotism, and I believe that my experience and
background has given me the judgment to make the decisions that are necessary
in this transcendent challenge of radical Islamic extremism.

I have great respect for everyone on this stage. It's a tough business we're
in and I appreciate them. I just believe that I am more qualified.


 Actually, it failed because the American people had no trust or confidence in the federal government to do its job, because we had passed a law in 1986 that said we'd allow citizenship and actually what happened was that we didn't secure the borders, as we promised. So Americans need to restore their trust and confidence. 

I know how to secure the borders.


 I come from a border state where our borders are broken. More people come across our border illegally every year than most any other state. 

And I will secure the borders first. And I will have the border states'
governors certify that those borders are secured. And we can do it with UAVs,
with vehicle barriers, with walls, and with high-tech cameras.

The remaining 12 million, obviously two million of them who have committed
crimes have to be rounded up and deported immediately. They cannot stay in our
society. And we must then, in my view, address it in as humane and
compassionate way as possible.

The three G.I.s who were missing last year in action, one of them was still
missing in action, his wife was about to be deported from this country. I'm
not going to deport the wife of a fighting serviceman who's missing in action.
I'm going to handle it in a humane, compassionate fashion.

And we will reward no one. They will have to get to the end of the line, pay a
fine, learn English, and we will secure the borders first. And I know how to
do that.


 Yes, I will and I'm disappointed, because I think it's very important that we make the Bush tax cuts permanent. I voted to make them permanent twice already. 

If people and businesses and families in America are now planning their 2010
budget, there's a great deal of uncertainty. And if we don't make the tax cuts
permanent, then they will experience what amounts to a tax increase.

I applaud the efforts and the rapidity with which apparently we are moving.

But I also would make sure that the -- not only the tax cuts are made
permanent, but we cut corporate income taxes. That would keep businesses here,
and it would keep jobs here and create jobs here. We pay the highest corporate
income tax of any nation in the world except for Japan.

I think that it would be very important that no pork barrel projects be added
as this bill winds its way through the various committees of Congress. I worry
about that. I worry that we're going to add pork barrel projects.

I'm glad to see that we're going to allow people to expense new investments in
equipment, so they can write them off in a -- in a very short period of time.

But I really think that -- that we have to understand that the rate cuts by
Bernanke are a good beginning. Apparently the markets have stabilized a little
bit.

But we also need to continue to cut tax rates in America. And we also have to
encourage savings, because if we don't restrain spending, if we don't restrain
spending, then we're going to end up in the same position that we were in
earlier, and that's with an economy that has very serious fiscal difficulties.


 Actually, I don't know where you got that quote from. I'm very well versed in economics. 

I was there at there at the Reagan Revolution. I was there when we enacted the
first, or just after we enacted the first tax cuts and the restraints on
spending. I was chairman of the Commerce Committee in the United States
Senate, which addresses virtually every major economic issue that affects the
United States of America.

I'm very well versed on economics, and that's why I have the support of people
like Jack Kemp, people like Phil Gramm, people like Warren Rudman, people like
Doug Holtz-Eakin, people like Marty Feldstein. That's why I have a strong team
around me that respect my views and my vision. And that's why The Wall Street
Journal, in a survey of economists recently, that the majority of economists
thought that I could handle the nation's economy best.

And I have been a consistent fighter to restrain spending and to cut taxes.
And my credentials and my experience and my knowledge of these economic
issues, I think, are extensive. And I would match them against anybody who's
running.


 Well, I'm sure the -- those people that had to pay it did -- (chuckles) -- I would imagine. 

But look, I voted -- I voted on the tax cuts because I knew that unless we had
spending under control, we were going to face a disaster. We let spending get
completely out of control. Of course, those tax cuts have to remain -- remain
permanent, otherwise people experience a tax increase.

We let spending get out of control. We Republicans lost an election -- we lost
an election because of the bridge to nowhere and the fact that we presided
over the biggest increase in the size of government that with -- since the
"Great Society." We -- we let it get out of control. And the fact is that if
we had had the spending restraints that I proposed, we would be talking about
more tax cuts today. We would be talking about more tax cuts. The trust and
confidence in our base was eroded. I will restore that trust and confidence
because I will restrain spending along with further tax cuts. And I'm very
proud of my record.

And if you look at those organizations that grade people -- such as the
National Taxpayers Union, the Citizens Against Government Waste, Citizens for
a Sound Economy, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce -- my record is very, very high
for a consistent record of being a fiscal conservative, a record that I'm very
proud of.


 But I'm going to stop the pork barrel spending, and we're not going to have any more "Bridges to Nowhere." 


 Because you can be sure, if you watch the Democrat debates, that they will increase spending, they will increase taxes, they will expand the size of government, and they will continue the spending spree which, to a large degree, the Republicans have greater responsibility. 

I'll give you some straight talk. And they will not restore the stability of
the entitlement programs, which are becoming more and more unfunded in their
liabilities in the future. The Democrats have already run and told us they
will increase our taxes. They will increase spending.

Look, the president of the United States signed into law, two years in a row,
pork barrel-laden bills, $35 billion worth of pork, worth of earmarked
projects which are outrageous. Now, we could have given a $1,000 tax credit
for every child in America for that $35 billion. Instead we chose a bridge to
nowhere.

I will, as president, veto every one of these big spending bills. I will
impose some fiscal discipline. There is nothing that -- anything the Democrats
have said except -- that I have seen except tax and tax, spend and spend,
elect and elect.

We will clean up our act and we will regain the confidence of the American
people as being careful stewards of our tax dollars, and we will fix this
problem with having to borrow money from China, because then we will balance
our budget, just like every governor in America has been required to do as
well.


 I know of no military leader, including General Petraeus, who says we can't sustain our effort in Iraq. So you're wrong. The fact is, we are succeeding in Iraq. We're going back down to previous levels, and we will be able to withdraw troops over time if we succeed. 

If we do what Senator Clinton said that she wanted to do night before last,
and that's wave the white flag of surrender and set a date of withdrawal, then
we will have expenses, my friends, in American blood and treasure, because al
Qaeda will then have won.

We are succeeding in Iraq, and every indicator is that, and we will reduce
casualties and gradually eliminate them. Anybody who doesn't understand that
it's not American presence, it's American casualties. We have American troops
all over the world today and nobody complains about it because we're defending
freedom.

That's one of the obligations of being the world's superpower.

I'm proud to be the only one on this stage that said that we have to abandon
the Rumsfeld strategy and we have to adopt the strategy that is succeeding,
and that's happened. I'm the only one that said that. It is succeeding. And we
will be able to reduce our costs, and we will be able to have a stable Middle
East, where our vital national interests, national security interests are at
stake.

And I'm so proud of the job that the men and women in the military are doing
there, and they don't want us to raise the white flag of surrender, like
Senator Clinton does. They know we can win. And their message to you and to me
is, let us win.


 It was worth getting rid of Saddam Hussein. He had used weapons of mass destruction, and it's clear that he was hell-bent on acquiring them. 

The problem was not the invasion of Iraq; the problem was the mishandling of
Iraq for nearly four years by Rumsfeld. And again, I railed against that. I
was criticized by Republicans. There were others that -- that called for a
phased or secret withdrawal.

The war in Iraq is justified because of the threat of Saddam Hussein.

It was the mishandling of the war. Now we're on the right track. Now we are
succeeding. And if we withdraw and if we decide that we have to get out of
there, I guarantee you al Qaeda will be trumpeting to the world that they have
defeated the United States of America --


 (Inaudible) -- my answer. 


 It was a good idea. It was not worth the failures that happened, but it is worth it at the end of the day because we will have peace and success in the Middle East, and our men and women will return, and return with honor, and they won't have to go back and fight al Qaeda there. 


 Governor Huckabee, you have been one of the strongest and most persuasive proponents of the so-called fair tax. And it is -- I must tell you, every town hall meeting I have, there's somebody that shows up with a T-shirt on and there's enormous groundswell for it. 

How do you answer the criticism that a flat-out just sales tax wouldn't cause
lower-income Americans more of the pain and the burden of running our
government and paying for its operations? How do you respond to that
particular criticism of it? And also, how do you account for the resonance
that this proposal has gotten throughout the nation?


 Well, obviously we'd like to see more sunshine. 

But I as president, as every other president, rely primarily on my secretary
of the Treasury, on my Council of Economic Advisers, on the head of that. I
would rely on the circle that I have developed over many years of people like
Jack Kemp, Phil Gramm, Warren Rudman, Pete Peterson and the Concord group. I
have a process of leadership, Ron, that is sort of an inclusive one that I
have developed, a circle of acquaintances and people that are supporters and
friends of mine who I have worked with for many, many years.


 You remember back in 1982 when Phil Gramm -- Phil Gramm and Warren Rudman and Gramm-Latta and all of those people got the first real tax cuts done, the real -- first real restraints in taxes. I was there. You were there. And I rely on those people to a much larger degree than any, quote, "formal" organization, although the secretary of Treasury is obviously one of the key and important posts that I would have. 


 Who's answering this question? (Laughter.) 


 Thank you. 


 Well, frankly, it takes a little more than 30 seconds. But this is a terrible problem, not only here in Florida but across the states that are subject to hurricanes. And as more and more violent weather patterns take place, people's homes are more and more in jeopardy. 

We've got to address this issue. We can address it regionally. We can address
it with the governors and the legislatures working with the federal government
to have insurance spread across state lines, increasing the risk pool. We can
reform insurance. We can -- there are so many things that we can do, and we
have to sit down together and figure it out.

Now, the bill that passed through the House of Representatives was $200
billion -- no insurance reform whatsoever associated with it, no way to pay
for it, and that burden is shared by everybody. We -- we can sit down together
-- I will call the regulators, the governors and the legislators together, and
we will work together, and we will provide every American that's in jeopardy
particularly of hurricanes to have the insurance that they need and deserve.
I'm confident we can do it together working with the insurance companies, not
setting up another huge federal bureaucracy of $200 billion which still nobody
has said how you're going to pay for.


 No, I am in favor of cap-and-trade. And Joe Lieberman and I, one of my favorite Democrats and I, have proposed that it's, and we did the same thing with acid rain. They're doing it in Europe now, although not very well. 

And all we are saying is, look, you can reduce your greenhouse gas emissions;
you earn a credit. Somebody else is going to increase theirs; you can sell it
to them.

And meanwhile we have a gradual reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.

We need a global agreement, but it has to include India and China. We need to
go back to nuclear power. We cannot be dependent on $400 billion a year paying
for foreign oil. There's a nexus here.

But climate change, in my view, is real. It can affect states like Florida
dramatically because I think it has to do with violent weather changes, as
well.

But I am confident, I am confident American technology can -- and the embrace
of green technologies, many of the things that Rudy just talked about, and
nuclear power being one of them -- we can reduce these greenhouse gas
emissions.

And suppose that we are wrong and there's no such thing as climate change and
we hand our kids a cleaner world. But suppose we are right and do nothing. I
think that's a challenge for America. We can meet it.


 In all due respect, Brian, I love the way you throw all those together. I'm so proud of my record on judges, that those of us who got together and got Justice Alito and Roberts and so many judges together. And I won't go list by list there, point by point. 

But look, I won the majority of Republican vote in both New Hampshire and
South Carolina. Most conservative Republicans' major concern is the threat of
radical Islamic extremism. I'm making my case that I can make American safe
and safer -- I can restore trust and confidence -- and that I can make the
needed changes to have the fundamentals of our economy, which are still
strong, bring us through this difficult times.

Conservative Republicans are also concerned about climate change that we just
mentioned because of their belief in their stewardship of this planet and our
stewardship. There's many people who are concerned and have a priority of the
-- the independence of the state of Israel. They know that I know how to keep
Israel independent as well.

So I'm proud of the broad base of support. I will continue to work in every
way to show people that I have a very, very conservative record. I'm proud to
be a conservative -- a conservative. But there are times, like when Rumsfeld's
strategy was going wrong, I was criticized by Republicans. When I opposed the
"Bridge to Nowhere," that was a Republican policy. When I went after Jack
Abramoff, there were people who were Republicans who suffered from that. When
I saved the taxpayers $6 billion in a bogus tanker deal, that was a Republican
policy deal there. So there are times -- and the reason why I've had such
strong support amongst independents is because they know that I'll put my
country above my party every single time, and I'm proud to be a conservative.


 Did you get my response? 


 (Laughs.) 


 (Laughs.) 


 Well, now that Sylvester Stallone has endorsed me, I'm sending him over to take care of Chuck Norris right away, and I'm going to get him. (Laughter.) 


 There you go. 


 And I'm glad that Stormin' Norman, General Schwartzkopf, has endorsed me as well. I'm very honored. We'll send him, too. 


 I don't. (Laughter.) 

Look, I've dealt with people and my friends and colleagues for many, many
years. I think they know me. I don't think I would have the support of so many
of my colleagues that I work with every day if that were the case. And I have
been able not only to make close friendships and warm ones over the years but
also across the aisle.

If you'll indulge me one second, I know this is unusual, but I happen to know
Rudy Giuliani. I happen to know he's an American hero, and I happen to have
gone to New York City after 9/11. And I'm proud of the way he led this country
and united it following 9/11.

And all these are good people who are running here, and I respect them. And I
intend to respect them both during and after this campaign is over.


 I think you could argue that Americans over all are better off because we have had a pretty good, prosperous time with low unemployment and low inflation, and a lot of good things have happened, a lot of jobs have been created. 

But let's have some straight talk. Things are tough right now. Americans are
uncertain of -- of this housing crisis. Americans are uncertain about the
economy as we see the stock market bounce up and down. But more importantly,
the economy, particularly in some parts of the country, the state of Michigan,
where Governor Romney and I campaigned -- not to my success, I might add --
and other parts of the country are probably better off.

But look, I think what we're trying to do to fix this economy is important.
We've got to address the housing subprime -- housing problem. We need to
obviously have this package go through the Congress as quickly as possible. We
need to make the Bush tax cuts permanent, which I voted for twice to do so. I
think we need to eliminate the alternate minimum tax that sits out there and
challenges 25 million American families.


 Pardon me. 


 I think we are better off overall, if you look at the entire eight-year period, when you look at the millions of jobs that have been created, the improvement in the economy, et cetera. 

But I'm trying to emphasize, Anderson, that we are in a very serious challenge
right now. There's a lot of Americans very uncertain about their future, and
we've got to give them some comfort. We've got to give them some stimulus.
We've got to give them some tax relief. We've got to stop this outrageous,
squandering spending that causes us to have to borrow money from China, and
we've got to get our fiscal house in order.

I think we went on a spending spree that frankly betrayed Ronald Reagan's
principles about tax cuts and restraint of spending.


 Let me note that I was endorsed by your two hometown newspapers, who know you best. 


 Including the very conservative Boston Herald, who know -- 


 \-- you well, better than anybody. So I -- I'll guarantee you the Arizona Republic will endorsing me, my friend. (Chuckles.) (Laughter.) 

Let me just say I'm proud of my conservative record. It's one of reaching
across the aisle to get things done for Americans, obviously, whether it be
McCain-Lieberman, that established the 9/11 commission, and then the
legislation that implemented that, or whether it be working across the aisle
on the Armed Services Committee to provide the men and women with what they
need to defend this nation. And I'm proud of that record.

And I heard Governor Romney describe his record.

As I understand it, his record was that he raised taxes by $730 million. He
called them fees; I'm sure the people that had to pay it -- whether they
called them bananas, they still had to pay $730 million extra. His job
creation was the third worst in the country as far as job creation is
concerned, and as we all know, he has sattled the people of Massachusetts with
a $245 million because of a big government-mandated health care system. And
while the rest of the country was losing 7 percent of the manufacturing jobs
while he was governor, 14 percent of the manufacturing jobs left the state of
Massachusetts.

So I am proud of my record, and I am proud of reaching across the aisle and
getting things done. That's what the American people want us to do, and the
legislation and the activities I've done, particularly in America's defense,
particularly in the fact that I've been involved in every major national
security challenge this nation has faced. And by the way, I think it would be
hard for people like Jack Kemp and Tom Ridge, former head of the Department of
Homeland Security, and Phil Graham and all of the long list of conservatives
that support me, both governors -- conservative governors -- in fact, your
former lieutenant governor, who spent a lot of time on the campaign trail with
us.

But the point is that I'm proud of the people that have surrounded me and are
supporting people, and whether they come from one part of the spectrum or the
other, strong conservatives are ones who are supporting me. And I'm proud of
their support, and I'll rely on people to judge me by the company that I keep.


 Well, and with some physical danger, I have to agree -- (laughter) -- with -- with the governor. 

Look, I'm a federalist, and I believe the states should decide to enormous
degrees what happens within those states, including off their coasts. The
people of California have decided they don't want oil drilling off their
coasts. The people of Louisiana have decided that they do.

I applaud the governor's efforts, and that of other states in this region, and
other states across America, to try to eliminate the greenhouse gas emissions
that are causing climate change.

Now, suppose that the governor and I are wrong, and there's no such thing as
climate change. And we adopt these green technologies, of which America and
the innovative skills we have and the entrepreneurship and the free market,
which is embodied by Senator Lieberman's and my cap-and-trade proposal, is
enacted, and there's no such thing as climate change. Then all we've done is
give our kids a cleaner world.

But suppose we do nothing. Suppose we do nothing and we don't eliminate this
$400 billion dependence we have on foreign oil. Some of that money goes to
terrorist organizations and also contributes to greenhouse gas emissions. Then
what kind of a world have we given our children?

The state of California and the state of Arizona -- we Westerners care very
much about our environment and we want to act. And it's no secret that I have
disagreed with the Bush administration in not being more active in addressing
the issue of climate change, whether it be through cap-and-trade, through tax
incentives or R&amp;D for green technologies and many other measures that I
think need to be taken.

We are -- we are feeling here in California pollution from China. It is a
global issue and we have to address it globally. And I would not agree to any
global agreement without India and China being part of it.

But I want to assure you that we have an obligation to try to stem this
greenhouse gas emissions, and one of the ways is through use of nuclear power.
The French generate 80 percent of their electricity with nuclear power. I
think that -- by the way, we now have a pro- American president of France,
which shows if you live long enough, anything is possible in this world.
(Laughter.)

But the point is, young Americans care. Californians care.

People all over this country care. And we have to address this issue. We can
do it. The greatness and strength of America is in our innovative capability
and our abiity to develop these green technologies. General Electric, the
world's largest corporation, is committed to green technologies. We can do it.

And to somehow believe it will cost more money if we unleash the innovative
and entrepreneurship of America, I think does not have confidence in the
ability of Americans to address this issue.


 Yeah, and it's tough and it's tough here in California. It's tough in Arizona. It's tough particularly all over but it's very tough particularly in the high-growth states. And I think the efforts that have been made so far are laudable. We may have to go further. 

But the fact that the FHAs and the other organizations of government under
Secretary Paulson's direction, and I think he is doing a good job sitting down
and fixing at least a significant number of these problems.

I think that we've got to return to the principle that you don't lend money to
people that can't pay it back. I think that there are some greedy people that
-- in Wall Street that perhaps need to be punished.

I think there's got to be a huge amount more of transparency as to how this
whole thing came about, so we can prevent it from happening again. When a town
in Norway is somehow affected by the housing situation in the United States of
America, it's -- we -- we've gotten ourselves into a very interesting dilemma.

If necessary, we're going to have to take additional actions and particularly
in cleaning up our mortgage -- a mortgage should be one page. And there should
be big letters at the bottom that says, "I understand this document." We ought
to adjust the mortgages of people who were eligible for better terms but were
somehow convinced to accept the mortgages which were more onerous on them.

We need to fix the rating systems, which -- which clearly were erroneous in
their -- in their ratings, which led people to believe that there were these
institutions which were stable, which clearly are not.

So I think what we've done so far is good. I think we may have to take further
steps if this subprime lending situation continues to be serious.

And finally -- could I just mention -- on the issue of rebates, fine, because
part of this is psychological. Part of the problem we have, of course, in any
recession is psychological and I'm still optimistic that nothing is
inevitable. I still rely on the innovation and the talent of the United States
of America, but we've got to make the tax cuts permanent. We need to get rid
of the alternate minimum tax. We need to give people a depreciation in one
year for their -- in business and investment. We need to encourage research
and development and tax credits that are associated with it. And we've got to
stop the spending. We've got to stop -- one place where Ron Paul and I are in
total agreement: spending is out of control, and I'm tired of borrowing money
from China.


 Actually, I think lower- and middle-income Americans need more help. Obviously I think that's the case today; that's one reason why we're giving them rebates. I was part of the Reagan revolution. I was there with Jack Kemp and Phil Graham and Warren Rudman and all these other first that wanted to change a terrible economic situation in America with 10 percent unemployment and 20 percent interest rates. 

I was proud to be a foot soldier, support those tax cuts, and they had
spending restraints associated with it.

I made it very clear when I ran in 2000 that I had a package of tax cuts,
which were very important and very impactful, but I also had restraints in
spending. And I disagreed when spending got out of control, and I disagreed
when we had tax cuts without spending restraint. And guess what? Spending got
out of control.

Republicans lost the 2006 election not over the war in Iraq; over spending.
Our base became disenchanted. If we had done what I wanted to do, we would not
only have had the spending restraint, but we'd be talking about additional tax
cuts today. I'm proud of my record. I'm proud of my record as a foot soldier
in the Reagan Revolution. And now I'm prepared to lead in restraining
spending.


 It won't. It won't. That's why we went through the debate. 


 No, I would not, because we know what the situation is today. The people want the border secured first. And so to say that that would come to the floor of the Senate, it won't. We went through various amendments which prevented that ever, that proposal. 

But look, we're all on agreement as to what we need to do. Everybody knows
that we can fight some more about it, about who wanted this or who wanted
that. But the fact is, we all know the American people want the border secured
first.

We will secure the borders first when I am president of the United States. I
know how to do that. I come from a border state, where we know about building
walls and vehicle barriers and sensors and all of the things necessary. I will
have the border state governors certify the borders are secured, and then we
will move on to the other aspects of this issue.

Probably as importantly is tamper-proof biometric documents, which then,
unless an employer hires someone with those documents, that employer will be
prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. And that will cause a lot of
people to leave voluntarily. There's 2 million people who are here who have
committed crimes. They have to be rounded up and deported.

And we're all basically in agreement there are humanitarian situations; it
varies with what -- how they've been here, et cetera, et cetera.

We are all committed to carrying out the mandate of the American people, which
is a national security issue, which is securing the borders. That was part of
the original proposal. But the American people didn't trust or have confidence
in us that we would do it. So we now know we have to secure the borders first.
And that is what needs to be done. That's what I'll do as president of the
United States.


 My bill will not be voted on. It will not be voted on. I will sit and work with Democrats and Republicans and with all people, and we will have the principles, securing the borders first -- and then if you want me to go through the description all over again, I would be glad to. We will secure the borders first. 


 That's the responsibility and the priority of the American people. 


 I'm proud of Sandra Day O'Connor as a fellow Arizonan, and my heart goes out to her and family that -- situation that they have today. And I'm proud of her. 

The judges I would appoint are along the lines of Judge -- Justices Roberts
and Alito have a proven record of strict interpretation of the Constitution of
the United States of America.

I'm not going to second-guess President Reagan.


 Well, of course, he said he wanted a timetable before that. We have to understand that we lost the 2006 election and the Democrats thought that they had a mandate. They thought they had a mandate to get us out of Iraq. And I was prepared to sacrifice whatever was necessary in order to stand up for what I believe in. 

Now, in December of 2006, after the election, Governor Romney was asked what
he thought about the surge. He said at that time: I won't weigh in; I'm a
governor. At the time he didn't want to weigh in because he was a governor, I
was out there on the front lines with my friends saying, we not only can't
withdraw, but we got to have an additional -- additional troops over there in
order for us to have a chance to succeed.

Then in April, April was a very interesting year (sic) in 2007. That's when
Harry Reid said the war is lost and we got to get out. And the buzzword was
"timetables." Timetables.

Governor, the right answer to that question was "no," not what you said, and
that was, we don't want to have to lay -- have them lay in the weeds until we
leave, and Maliki and the president should enter into some kind of agreement
for, quote, "timetables."

Timetables was the buzzword for withdrawal.


 I'm using your whole quote, where you said -- 


 The actual quote is, we don't want them to lay in the weeds until we leave. That is the actual quote, and I'm sure fact-checkers -- 


 It means a timetable for until we leave. 

(Cross talk.)


 I'm the expert on this -- when you said, I won't weigh in; I'm a governor. 


 You couldn't weigh in because you were a governor back when we were having the fight over it. 


 The fact is that I have fought for this surge. I have said, we need to have this succeed. I know the situation in Iraq and I am proud to have supported this president and supported the fact that we are succeeding in Iraq today. 

If we had done, if we had waited, laid in the weeds until we leave, then al
Qaeda would have won, and we would be facing a disastrous situation.


 Timetables and milestones. 


 (Inaudible) -- (cheers, applause) -- until the enemy waits in the weeds until we leave. That means that we were leaving. 


 (Inaudible) -- 

(Cross talk.)


 (Inaudible) -- could not weigh in as governor on the surge when it was a critical issue, and I'm sorry -- 


 (Off mike) -- 


 Timetables was the buzz word for those who've wanted to get out. 


 It was raised many times. I've raised it many times, is whether you have the experience and the judgment to lead this country in the war against radical Islamic extremism. I've raised that many times. 


 And I will continue to raise it. 


 That was the critical time of the debate. It wasn't clear -- it wasn't -- and when he said what he said in December, it was after the election. President Bush fired Rumsfeld, and we announced that we were going to have a new strategy. That was the critical time. Timetables was the buzzwords. Timetables were the ones. 

And as far as Washington-type politics is concerned, I think my friend
Governor Huckabee, sir, will attest the millions of dollars of attack ads and
negative attacks you leveled against him in Iowa, the millions of dollars of
attack ads you attacked against me in New Hampshire and have ever since -- a
lot of it's your own money you're free to do with what you want to.

You can spend it all. But the fact is that --


 \-- (chuckles) -- your negative ads, my friends, are -- have set the tone, unfortunately, in this campaign. 

I say to you again, the debate after the election of 2006 was whether we were
going to have timetables for withdrawal or not. Timetables were the buzz word.
That was the Iraq study group. That was what the Democrats said we wanted to
do. Your answer should have been no.


 You're not going to let me address the quote that -- 

(Cross talk.)


 Thank you. It's a false argument. It's a false argument. We are going to be there for some period of time, but it's American casualties, not American presence. 

We've got troops right next door in Kuwait; we'll probably have them there for
a long time. We have troops in Bosnia. We've had troops in South Korea for
some 50 years. And by the way, President Eisenhower didn't bail us out of
Korea.

But the point is -- the point is that we need to protect America's national
security interests.

It's not a matter of presence. It's a matter of casualties. We are succeeding.

We are succeeding, and I unequivocally put my career and my political fortunes
on the line, and unequivocally said, we're going to support this surge. We're
not going to talk about timetables or anything else. We're going to talk about
winning and what's necessary to win.

And I'm the only one that said that Rumsfeld had to go, and the Petraeus
strategy is the one that can succeed. That's because I have the experience,
the knowledge and the judgment, and I believe that Americans will come home
with honor. And the fact is, and the fact is that it's not American presence,
because America, as the world's superpower, is going to have to be a lot of
places in the world. It's how they come home and as president, I will follow
in this tradition of sticking to my principles no matter what, and bring our
troops home with honor. (Applause.)


 Because I know how to lead. I know how to lead. I led the largest squadron in the United States Navy, and I did it out of patriotism, not for profit. And I can hire lots of managers, but leadership is the quality that people look for. 

And I have the vision and the knowledge and the background to take on the
transcendent issue of the 21st century, which is radical Islamic extremism.
I've been involved in every single major national security crisis since -- in
the last 20 years. I'm proud to have played a role in those. And I'm proud to
have played a role in making sure that we didn't raise the white flag in
surrender in Iraq, as the Democrats wanted us to do and we would have done if
we'd have set timetables for withdrawal.

So the fact is -- so the fact is that I have the qualifications and the
knowledge and the background and the judgment. I don't need any on-the-job
training.

I had the great honor of serving this country in uniform for 22 years. I had
the great honor of being inspired while I was in the prison camps of North
Vietnam by the news of a governor and his wife who cared very much about those
of us who were in captivity.

And when I came home I was inspired by him, and I voted for him and I
supported him. And I was proud to be a leader in the Reagan revolution -- I
mean, a foot soldier in the Reagan revolution as we fought these wars together
with unshakable courage and principle. And I'm prepared to follow in his
tradition and in his foot steps.


 Oh, I'm sure that, as I say, he's a fine man. And I think he managed companies, and he bought, and he sold, and sometimes people lost their jobs. That's the nature of that business. 

But the fact is -- but the fact is we're at a time in our history -- we're in
a time in our history where you can't afford any on-the- job training. And I
believe that my experience and background qualifies me to lead.

And that's why I've gotten the support of four former secretaries of state,
two of them in the Reagan administration. That's why I've gotten the support
of General Norman Schwarzkopf.

That's why I've gotten the support of over 100 retired Army generals and
admirals. Literally every national security expert from the Reagan and other
administrations are supporting my candidacy, including the former head of the
Department of Homeland Security, my friend, Governor Tom Ridge, who believe
that I have the qualities necessary to lead.


 I hope that some people judge me by those that are supporting me. 


 Ronald Reagan would not approve of someone who changes their positions depending on what the year is. 

Ronald Reagan -- Ronald Reagan came with an unshakable set of principles, and
there were many times, like when he had to deploy the (INAUDIBLE) cruise
missile to Europe and there were hundreds of thousands of demonstrators
against it, he stood with it. Ronald Reagan had a deal in Reykjavik that
everybody wanted him to take, but he stuck with his principles.

I think he knows that I stick with my principles. I put my political career on
the line because I knew what would happen if we failed in Iraq.

I hope that the experience I had serving as a foot soldier in his revolution
would make him proud for me to continue that legacy of sticking to principle
and doing what you believe in, no matter what.


