 Well, let me add -- let me add my voice in thanking Howard University for hosting this this evening and Tavis, thank you as well. 

It's an appropriate first question that was asked here. And to bring up the
issue of education, of discrimination, at this wonderful institution is
critically important. The shame of all of this is that long before the
decision was reached today or yesterday in the Seattle cases, the shame of
resegregation has been occurring for years in our country here. The reality
that our public educational system is today a segregated system and that we
have not taken enough leadership over the years to understand the great damage
that has done to our country.

This evening there'll be many subjects that'll be raised, and important ones.
None is more important, in my view, than the issue of education. Whether or
not from the earliest education opportunity to the highest level of education
opportunity, this is the key to equal access to our society. It is something
that can never be taken away from you if you get it. To say today that you're
going to exclude race as a means of allowing for the diversity in our
communities is a major step backwards. And as president of the United States,
I would use whatever tool is available to me to see to it that we reverse this
decision today, get back on the track to see to it that our country once again
will identify with the identity of unity as a nation, blind, if you will, to
the racial distinctions in our society. That's the only way we're going to
deal with the new frontiers of the 21st century. The barrios, the ghettos, and
the reservations of our society. That's what I stand for, that's what we'll
achieve as a Democratic administration. (Applause.)

 My name is Christopher Dodd. I'm a United States senator from the state of Connecticut. 


 Well, first of all, let me thank John Edwards for the nice compliment. I appreciate that in the midst of all this. 

Wolf, the first responsibility and the first priority of an American president
is to keep our country safe and secure. This policy in Iraq has failed. It is
a civil war in that country. Everyone who has looked at this issue has drawn
the conclusion that there is no military solution to it. It seems to me, then,
it's incumbent upon us, given the fact that we are less safe, less secure,
more vulnerable, weaker today, not stronger, as a result of this policy, that
we ought to try to bring it to a close.

And so I thought the right thing to do was to pursue and push this issue of
having a date certain --


 \-- tied to funding. Very, very important so that we have the ability to move beyond this. 

This war has been -- caused many casualties, not the least of which are our
troops, obviously, but also the foreign policy. Your first question on terror
has been directly affected because of this policy in Iraq.


 Well, I think the points that have been made by Barack Obama and Hillary are very, very important here. This is the kind of question that does divide us. 

Just a related point here. We need to be encouraging more language training in
our country. At the time of the 9/11 attacks here, we had advertisements
running in national newspapers for anybody who could speak Arabic here. We
have too few of our people in this country that can understand second
languages. This is the 21st century. This is a global economy. We need to
encourage more diversity in that. Certainly we have a national language here.


 I speak fluent Spanish, along with Bill Richardson. I'm proud of the fact I speak two languages. But we ought to be encouraging more of that in the country and not talking about how we have one official language in our nation. 


 That's not helping our country. 


 Well, listen, this is a -- there's not a person in this audience who is watching this program who wouldn't tell you that they've encountered the problems with the health care system in this country. It is shameful. We rank 42nd in infant mortality in the United States worldwide. We rank 45th in life expectancy. It is shameful that in the 21st century we have 47 million of our fellow citizens without heath care coverage, 9 million children, and the number's growing every single day. 

Look, we've said here, it's basic agreement about universality here, dealing
with information technology, preventative care, chronic illnesses. What's been
missing in all of this is the ability to bring people together to get the job
done.


 That's what I've done for 26 years, that's what you need to be able to do. And you're going to get -- no one party is going to right this whole thing. 


 It's going to take cooperation to get it done. 


 Well, this is a major crisis issue, obviously. Energy-related problems, obviously, are problems with global warming; the dependency on the Middle East for so much of our energy supplies. It's a national security issue. It's a health care issue. The problems are profound here and require some very strong answers. 

I also think this issue provides incredible opportunities for us to grapple
with and deal with here, if we have the kind of strong leadership in the
country. I believe we can make a difference here on reducing our dependency on
those sources of energy while simultaneously rolling back the problems of
global warming.

Today we have the solar -- polar caps, rather -- melting. We have greenhouse
gases that are accumulating at record levels, way beyond expectations. We
really have the dual responsibility here of reducing the polluting effects of
depending upon fossil fuels and also allowing us to develop the alternative
technologies that would allow us to move beyond this issue.

I've introduced a plan here that would require, by the year 2017, 50-miles-
per-gallon standard for automobiles. I believe that can be done. We ought to
do it immediately, in my view, and a carbon tax, in my view, so that you make
these polluting dependencies, the polluting fuels more expensive and encourage
then for the use of revenues collected to move aggressively on developing the
alternative technologies of solar and wind and other sources of energy we
could use.


 Well, what we've offered already, in fact, and that is, of course, we ought to be saying here that when the price of a barrel of oil gets beyond $40 a barrel, where there's plenty of profit here, that those dollars ought to be returned to the consumers in a rebate or plowed back into the research that would allow us to develop alternative technologies. 

But the real way to get away from this here, our dependency on that kind of
fuel is causing us serious problems across the board. So it isn't just a
price-of-fuel issue here. It's also depending upon polluting technologies that
are going to cost us so much.


 Well, first of all, thank you for your service as well. And by the way, whatever other disagreements there are about policy, all of us here on this dais applaud immensely the work being done by our men and women in uniform. I think a round of applause for -- (interrupted by applause). 

And that's the right issue, I think. We're not listening to our senior
military people, by the way, who tried to engage in the transformation of our
military needs here, recognizing that there are different threats we face
today than we did during the Cold War. And clearly, there needs to be a
reassessment of what those priorities are, what those systems are so that
we're strong enough.

We all need to say this, by the way. I think it's very, very important. No
one's going to be elected president or ought to be president that's not going
to have as their primary priority keeping us safe and secure. That is the
principal responsibility of an American president.


 But to do that, to do that, you've also got to make sure that we're going to be prepared to use that force not as the first arrow we draw out of the quiver, but rather utilizing the other resources we have as a nation to advance our interests. That has not happened here under this administration. We need to get back to that as a nation. 


 Yeah, absolutely. Clearly -- 


 We've got systems here -- the F-22 we're looking at, for instance -- other things that ought to be reassessed in terms of whether or not they fit into 21st century military needs of our nation. 


 I think that goes too far, Wolf. Here, look, we've -- this is a major issue. There are ways of dealing with this. We're not only going to elect a president in November of 2008; we're going to elect arguably the most important, if not the most important, leader in the world, and it's going to be critically important that we use the tools available to us to exercise the influence we'd like on China, on Russia and other nations to be more cooperative and participate in solving some of these problems here. That's going to require real leadership based on experience that knows how to bring people together, certainly reminding the Chinese to the importance of this issue, utilizing those tools that are available to us. 


 But the idea that you'd go in and stop the Olympics from happening I don't think gets you there. 

I think that it's more likely to delay the kind of influence and support China
ought to be providing.


 (Wait a minute ?). If people are going to cancel the Olympics. If people are going to cancel the Olympics. That's not a bad question. You asked the question. 


 I'd like to know what my colleagues would feel about it. 


 Yeah. I don't think you should. I think that's wrong. 


 I don't think so, Wolf, at all. 

I served as a Peace Corps volunteer back in the 1960s when an American -- I've
been asked a million times, why did I join the Peace Corps? And I did so
because an American president asked me to. He asked a generation of us to be a
part of something larger than ourselves. Some went off to join VISTA; some got
out in the civil rights movement; others went in the military; others went to
the Justice Department. It was a very exciting time to be alive.

But today, in the world we're living in today, I don't think we need to go to
a draft at all. We don't need the numbers of people in the service. But I like
the idea -- we tried it with AmeriCorps and other things -- to provide the
kind of financial relief.

This young man is finishing high school. He -- assume you're going to go on to
higher education -- I hope you are. Looking at the staggering costs, the rip-
offs that are occurring -- with people manipulating through deceit and fraud
-- the student loan programs, I'd like to see us offer some real opportunities
for you financially to give something back to your country.


 In return, we make it possible for you to get that higher education without incurring a lifetime of debt. That would be a valuable way of doing things, in my opinion. (Applause.) 


 Thanks, Wolf, for the question -- 


 Well listen, first of all, as president here, we ought to be discouraging that behavior because it is a problem. 

Clearly the budget is getting out of control as a result of those practices.
But I wouldn't want to have a blanket approach to that. There may be some
critical issues that occur, events like Katrina and other events where the
Congress needs to respond, you haven't gone through the process before -- I
wouldn't want to put us in that kind of a rigid straitjacket. But clearly,
when you're going beyond that, we need to have more discipline in the process.

I've been a longtime supporter, offered the first -- one of the first pay-as-
you-go budgets back some 23 years ago in the United States Senate. The
question that came up earlier about specific policies and ideas -- I think
with rare exceptions, you ought to be able to have accounting for either the
tax cut or the spending program and pay for them. We've gone on too long
allowing for these things to build and grow, and the deficits are a problem.
Dennis is right -- $2.2 trillion of public debt being held outside the country
-- the good news is the Chinese are buying it; the bad news is the Chinese are
buying it, because it puts us at a very disadvantageous position when it comes
to arguing against currency manipulation.

So getting better control of our fiscal policies --


 \-- our fiscal policies ought to reflect our moral values. Our fiscal policies ought to be fair, they ought to be practical, they ought to be pro-growth and they ought to be responsible. 


 That's not happening when you have earmarks year in and year out and not having the kind of influence that would eliminate them except in those rare circumstances where you may need to have them. 


 Well, I'd try to restore the constitutional rights in our country. (Applause.) This administration has done great damage to them. I would do that on the first day. I wouldn't wait a hundred days on those issues. 


 Thank you, Tavis. 

As I said at the outset on the first question, I don't believe there's any
other issue as important as this one we'll discuss this evening, as education.
There's a lot of good talk here, and I admire the fact that my colleagues here
and candidates all care deeply about this issue. I stand before you as a
candidate. We have to make a decision about, who is our best candidate to win
the presidency in 2008?

For 26 years, through five terms in the United States Senate, I have dedicated
myself to this issue. I'm very proud of the fact that Marian Wright Edelman of
the Children's Defense Fund has come to me over and over again, and proud to
have authored the legislation to deal with the whole child, that authored the
first child care legislation in this country, to begin in the earliest days to
make sure that parents have the assurance that there will be a quality place
for their child to be, and an affordable place, an available place, and then
to begin with early childhood education, to see to it that we'd have a good
Head Start program.

I'm proud of the fact that I was called the Senator of the Decade by National
Head Start Association. (Applause.) I have walked the walk on these issues; I
am committed to these issues. There's nothing that will be a higher priority
to me as president of the United States than to see to it that America's
children, from the earliest days of their arrival, certainly through the upper
education branches of our educational system, have the equal opportunity.

None of us here can guarantee success --


 \-- but we have an obligation to guarantee an opportunity to that success. The key to that door is the education of the American child. (Applause.) 


 Well, thank you. 

I want to -- I'd certainly underscore a number of the suggestions that have
been made dealing with this. I'd add another one additionally, and that is the
-- a need for far broader usage of school-based clinics in our society, where
children have the opportunity to be able to confront and talk with people that
may be willing to give them the kind of sound advice they need on sexual
education and the like.

But also each and every one of us can play a role in this. There's a job,
obviously, for government here in funding and support. But I believe that each
and every citizen bears a responsibility to reach out and do what they can to
educate a child. Our church is doing this in many ways. We need to do a better
job in our schools, inviting parents and insisting there be more participation
in our school systems.

It isn't just HIV/AIDS. The minority community, the African American
community, in our country suffers from a lack of access to a wide variety of
health care needs. Infant mortality among the black community is two-
and-a-half times what it is in the white community. The problems of
cardiovascular diseases, obesity, diabetes -- you go down a long list.
(Applause.)

It isn't just AIDS; it's a wide range of these issues. And we need to begin to
address this issue by understanding that it isn't just universal coverage but
access to that coverage which has been missing --


 \-- and to understand there's a variety of issues that need to be addressed in addition to HIV/AIDS. 


 But each and every one of us as citizens can make a difference. (Applause.) 


 I was going to say, Tavis, I was going to say, I'll take Global Warming for 600 here. I thought maybe -- (laughter). 


 (Laughs.) 


 Sort of the end of the line here. 


 Thank you, Tavis. 

I happen to believe very strongly that our tax and fiscal policies ought to
reflect our moral values and that our tax and fiscal policies ought to be
fair, responsible, and pro-growth, as well. We live in a society where
obviously it's going to be important to expand our economy so that jobs will
be created, businesses can grow, people have an opportunity in this life.

I'm deeply disappointed, as many. We had a very good period of time, I might
say, under the Clinton administration, where we balanced the budget. We had a
tax policy that was much more fair. We need to get back to those days again
where we had that kind of fiscal policy.

One of the taxes that needs to be addressed -- because we're losing
manufacturing jobs in this country. We today reward industries that leave
America by giving them tax breaks. I would like to see us reward companies
that stay in our inner cities, go to places where jobs ought to be created.
(Applause.) That to be a part of our tax policy as well.


 Well, I agree -- I think the mandatory minimum sentencing has been a disaster. I'm a strong supporter of Charlie Rangel's efforts here to eliminate the distinction between crack cocaine and powder cocaine. (Applause.) That'll have a big difference in terms of who actually goes to jail in this country. 

And then obviously, as well, we need to have a Justice Department that is not
going to be politicized, as we've watched this one, with U.S. attorneys who do
the political work rather than doing the justices' work in our country. As
president, I will insist upon that. I'm sure the rest of my colleagues would
here. We'll get better justice with Democrats in the White House.


 I would as well. I -- New Orleans and Katrina have become a symbol of everything that went wrong with this administration's failure to respond to a people in need. I could think of no better way to have New Orleans and Katrina, that event, become a symbol of what we can do right in this country, by giving people the opportunity to come back and the support they will need to regain their lives. 

This is an American city. Anywhere else in America, we'd want to step up and
see to it that people would get that help; this is the least we ought to be
able to do to see to it they get their lives back together.


 Yes, I disagree. I think it's a huge issue here. The fact of the matter is we're exporting a lot of valuable jobs in this country and we shouldn't be doing it. I offered legislation that was passed that prohibited the Defense Department for outsourcing contracts, going off our shores here when many hard-working Americans ought to be allowed to do those jobs. 

I talked earlier about providing tax incentives. When you have people
literally driving to the international airports to fly to some country to
provide some funding for a local project in those nations, bypassing the very
communities that could very well use those kind of jobs and economic growth,
that is wrong. I will continue to do what I can to see to it that we limit
outsourcing American jobs. (Applause.)


 Well, we've unfortunately, as a result of our conflict in Iraq, the sustaining of a military presence there, have lost our moral authority, unfortunately. And as a result of that, our ability to mobilize the world on issues like Darfur has been severely damaged. 

But the United States should be able to take some unilateral action here in
providing the kind of protection where people are being slaughtered in that
country; and in the meantime, get our military out of Iraq, as I've planned
and offered to do, and thus regain that stature, which we need to be doing as
a nation in this world and be able to build those coalitions --


 \-- (that will ?) respond to an issue like Darfur. But in the meantime, the United States ought to act. (Applause.) 


 — is the ability to bring people together to get the job done. 


 Well, I think so. You all look back -- I think, you know, speeches are easy to make and rhetoric is easy to expose here, but I think the idea of looking back and saying, what have you done -- if you want to get a good idea of where someone is going to lead or how they're going to lead, I think it's very appropriate to say, what have you done? Show me, demonstrate to me the ability to get these things done that you can't get done in the past. 


 Well, thank you, first of all. And thank you for the warm welcome this evening. I'm a union guy -- (cheers) -- proudly a union man, and thank you for inviting us to be here tonight. 

Let me first of all say that all of us here on the stage at this very moment
are thinking about those six mine workers in Utah that are struggling, and
their families, this evening. I can't begin without mentioning them and what
they're going through this evening.

I happen to believe that putting our country back to work begins by cutting
the funding for the war in Iraq. (Cheers, applause.) Spending $12 billion
every month, spending $2 billion every week has got to stop if we're going to
have a different set of priorities in our country.

I happen to believe that we need to look at our defense systems and decide
which defense systems we need in order to face the threats that we face in the
21st century. Looking at some of these programs out there, such as the Star
Wars program, the defense -- missile defense system, I think, frankly, we need
a different set of priorities.

We ought to be investing in the bridges and the highways and the water
systems, the safe drinking systems in our country here.

In fact, just five or six days ago, after working a year and a half on this
issue, Keith, I introduced legislation to do exactly that. For every $1
billion we spend in that area, 40,000 jobs can be created in the United States
of America. Those are the things I'll do as president of the United States if
elected by my party, and I'm confident a Democrat is going to be elected
president of the United States in November of 2008. (Cheers, applause.)


 No, I agree. I think this requires modification. 

But we also need to do something else here. In addition to having trading
agreements that include labor, environmental, health provisions in them,
insisting on those provisions in any trading agreement here, we need to stop
exporting the jobs in the country that already are here. I offered legislation
by banning the outsourcing of jobs in the Senate.

You know, one of the things that labor does and I've always admired is you
listen to the speeches that are given, but one of the things you've always
wanted to know: If I have a better idea about where you're going to take me if
I know where you've been. And I'm proud to say for 26 years on every major
issue that labor's been involved in I've stood with you. I've stood with labor
in banning outsourcing of jobs, of offset contracts, of situs picketing, on
plant closing legislation.

We need to stand up for the American worker here. That's the best way to
create the jobs in the United States.


 Well, again, I'd agree with what's been said here. In fact, last week, we -- I passed legislation out of the committee to deal with the Chinese currency situation. It's a massive subsidy for them in terms of disadvantaging our manufacturers here. 

And I would say they're a competitor, but be careful. It's getting close to
adversary. Let's not have any illusions here. China's investing a great deal
of its resources in building up a military capacity. And in the 21st century,
we'd better recognize here, while they're competitors today, if we're not
careful here, then we could face some serious problems with China in the
latter part of this century.

We need to be insisting, Keith, that for every product or every ability they
are -- in our shelves here, we need to be insisting that we have access to
their shelves, to their marketplaces. That's not happening, and it needs to
stop.


 Well, let me take 10 seconds and first of all, this evening there are a lot of young men and women serving in Iraq and Afghanistan, and whatever your views on policy in Iraq, every one of us owe them a deep debt of gratitude and appreciation. (Cheers, applause.) They haven't failed; the policy has. How about hearing it for our men and women in uniform. (Cheers, applause.) 

(Inaudible) -- I believe, and have led on this over the last number of months
here, to begin redeploying immediately. We can do so with two and a half
divisions coming out each month, done safely and reasonably well. We then need
to have a robust approach on diplomacy. This administration has treated
statecraft and diplomacy as if it were a gift to our opponents, a sign of
weakness.

The United States has been successful in both Democratic and Republican
administrations over the years when we have drawn the diplomatic arrow out of
our quiver here. To make a difference around the world, we shouldn't be
selling arms to Saudi Arabia while they're refusing to support us in Iraq.

We need to have a clear message to everybody in the region that we want them
to be part of the solution.


 Well, let me say on these matters here, I've spent 26 years on the Foreign Relations Committee dealing with these matters here on almost every major foreign policy debate; words mean things. We've got to be very careful about language that's used in terms of the danger and harm it can do to our nation. 

My view was when you raise -- issues are being raised about Pakistan,
understand that while General Musharraf is no Thomas Jefferson, he may be the
only thing that stands between us and having an Islamic fundamentalist state
in that country. And so what I'd like to see him change -- the reality is if
we lose him, then what we face is an alternative that could be a lot worse for
our country.

I think it's highly responsible -- or irresponsible for people who are running
for the presidency and seek that office to suggest we may be willing
unilaterally to invade a nation here who we're trying to get to be more
cooperative with us in Afghanistan and elsewhere.

So my views -- and I say this respectfully to my friend from Illinois here --
I think it was wrong to say what he did in that matter. I think it's important
for us to be very careful about the language we use, make it clear that if
this United States is going to build the relationships around the world, we're
going to have to do so with allies, in some cases allies that we may not
particularly like.


 Well, I just want to say, look -- and Barack, you know, I've certainly said, look, I made a mistake in that vote in 2002. I don't deny that. But when you make a mistake, as you run on something like this, I think if I had the courage, I made a mistake on the vote in 2002; if you're making a mistake today, you ought to stand up and say so. 

It was a mistake, in my view, to suggest somehow that going in unilaterally
here into Pakistan was somehow in our interest. That, I think, is dangerous.
And I don't retreat from that at all.


 Well, first of all, thank you. I believe I'm the only candidate on this stage who actually served in the National Guard and Reserves back in the 1960s and ‘70s, so I'm someone who's standing and feeling what it means to be in uniform. 

Over the last four years, I've offered on four different occasions on the
floor of the United States Senate -- my colleagues are aware of this --
efforts to see that body armor and equipment would be available for our troops
on the ground in Iraq and Afghanistan, and on four individual occasions I was
rebuffed by Republicans in the United States Senate. This bologna about how
they care for our troops in Iraq when they wouldn't be willing to stand up and
provide the kind of protection they deserve is something I would never ever
tolerate as president of the United States.

Our soldiers deserve to get the best we have to offer -- not the Army they
have, the very best they deserve. Certainly that family's a classic example of
it.


 Okay, great question. (Applause.) Let me say one quick thing on this health care issue. Every member of Congress up here has a pretty good health care plan; I want Americans to have as good a health care plan as members of Congress have. (Crowd reacts.) 

Regarding this issue here -- look, on energy issues here, I believe very
strongly that we all share the same goals up here, that I stand for having an
80 percent reduction in CO2 by the year 2080; we do so by setting a mile per
gallon standard of 50 miles per gallon by the year 2017. There were
automobiles produced back in 1983 that got 43 miles per gallon; we can do a
lot better.

I would tax those who pollute. I would use the money from that to invest in
the alternative technologies of wind and solar and ethanol and other biofuels
that would make it possible for us to become independent. There's no other
gift that you and I could give to our children and our grandchildren that
could be more important that having an independent energy policy utilizing the
technologies and ideas that exist in this country.

It ought to be a priority for us to do so, to improve our health, to create
jobs and to lessen the kind of national security problems we face all over the
world because of oil interests. I stand for it and as president, I'll fight
for it.


 Well, no, I don't -- Homeland Security is far too large, in my view, and of course, the efforts to deprive people to be able to organize into that department was one of the great tragedies, in my view, here. People ought to be allowed to organize, collectively bargain, the department of employees -- Homeland employees in our country here. 

And certainly, I happen to believe that we're not safer today even though we
have not had an attack on our own soil. Tell that to the people in Iraq, tell
that to the people in Afghanistan, tell that to the people around the world.
Terrorism's a real issue. It's going to require a collective effort on behalf
our nation working with others to make a difference. Terrorism is a tactic,
it's not a philosophy, and it's going to require an inordinate amount of
cooperation to solve that. Having the kind of first responders at home like
the firefighters and police and EMS services that have the tools and the
ability to stand up and defend our country has not been funded.

So while we haven't been attacked, I think we're vulnerable today more so than
we were right after 9/11.


 No, I think all of us are troubled by it. But I think what needs to be understood, this campaign started early not because it began with the top down. It began because people like those gathered here this evening were so frustrated and so angry over how this administration was treating our country at home and abroad that they were demanding answers. 

Were this a parliamentary system, George Bush would be gone by tonight.
(Applause.) We don't have a parliamentary system. We have an election system.
And so the frustration comes from the bottom up.

And I happen to believe what Joe and Hillary have said here. If we start doing
the job that we're committed to, if you look at our records and where we've
been on these issues over the years, you have a higher degree of confidence in
that. And if we begin working on health care, on education, on energy and
environmental policy, putting people back to work, you can have all the
campaigns you want --


 \-- but America, I think, will respect that and rally behind it. 


 Well, Tim, I believe that this issue is going to come back to haunt us. We all learned, some of us here painfully, back in 2002 that by voting for an authorization regarding Iraq, that despite the language of that resolution, which called for diplomacy at the time, this administration used that resolution, obviously, to pursue a very aggressive action in Iraq. 

I'm of a view here -- what you didn't learn back in '02, you should have
learned by now. And you don't have to just listen to this resolution. There's
been a series of drumbeats by this administration, by Dick Cheney, by the
president, by others clearly pointing in the direction that would call for
military action in Iran. It is a dangerous move, in my view, and therefore I
thought it was incumbent upon us.

It was interesting that people like Dick Lugar, the former Republican chairman
of the Foreign Relations Committee; Chuck Hagel, of Nebraska, Republicans,
also had serious reservations and voted against that resolution the other day,
on September 26th. I'm very concerned that we're going to see those 76 votes
come back, being waved in front of us here as a justification when the Bush
administration decides to take military action in Iran.

So it was a moment -- it's critical moment when I think leadership is called
for here. If you're going to seek the leadership of our country, this is the
most serious time in a generation. You have an ascending China. You have an
Iranian that's ambitious to acquire nuclear weapons. You have obviously a $4
trillion economy that's in trouble, a health care crisis in this country,
energy and other issues that are going to confront the next president. Good
judgment and leadership at critical moments must be a part of this debate and
discussion. That was a critical moment, and the wrong decision was made, in my
view.


 Well, listen, I -- there's a deeper question here because not only with the pledge you make, but this audience and others here make a determination which of us here have the experience, the background here to manage the situation. It's a critical question. 

As I said at the outset of my -- the first question you gave me here, this is
the most critical time in a generation in this country. The problems are in
the Middle East and what's going on in the Far East, as well as in Latin
America and elsewhere, and which of us here brings the background, the
experience, the ability to make a difference on these issues, including the
question of Iran.

I agree with, Joe. I think the more immediate problem is Pakistan, the one
that needs to be addressed, but certainly bringing that experience together so
that you're able to marshal the resources, put together the kind of team and
demonstrate as a result of what you've been able to accomplish over the years
that you can actually handle this situation. Results matter. Experience
matters. Having to demonstrate an ability to deal with these issues is
critical.

So certainly, I would make a pledge, obviously, to do everything we can to
avoid this problem, but I would suggest to you, Tim, that the more immediate
issue is the one exactly that Joe has identified here. Pakistan does pose a
more serious issue for this country and one that needs to be addressed. That's
what I did in Latin American when I negotiated the settlements in El Salvador
and Nicaragua, going back 20 years ago -- deeply involved in the process,
working day after day with various elements, to bring about the kind of
results that today has reduced the threats of violence in that part of the
world.

That's what's needed here -- a leader that has the experience and the
background to grapple with these issues.


 Well, first of all, I think electability is a very critical issue. Look, at the end of this process here, we need to have a Democrat in the White House come January 20th, 2009. 

That is essential, in my view, to get this country back on its feet again, to
restore our moral authority in the world. It is a critical question.

Whether it's fair or not fair, the fact of the matter is that my colleague
from -- from New York, Senator Clinton, there are 50 percent of the American
public that say they're not going to vote for her. I'm not saying that people
don't know already. I don't necessarily like it, but those are the facts. We
as a party certainly have to take that into consideration.

But let me add, since the matter's been brought up here, as well here, this
situation -- ethics situation does bother me in a sense, what Bill Richardson
has alluded to. Our friend John Edwards here, certainly taking money from the
trial bar, special interest group, here to be condemning one candidate for
taking money from one group as opposed to another.

I happen to believe we ought to have public financing for our campaigns. I've
supported that for 25 years. I managed the McCain- Feingold legislation on the
floor of the United States Senate several years ago. I won't take a backseat
to anybody on trying to reform our political process.

But let's remember what's at stake here. We need to elect a Democrat -- a
Democrat that's electable and a Democrat that can bring to the country
together. For 26 years I have, in every major landmark piece of legislation,
had a Republican as my cosponsor because no one party is going to straighten
all of this out. When I started the Children's Caucus in 1981, I did it with
Arlen Specter of this state. When I wrote the Family and Medical Leave bill, I
did it with Kit Bond and Dan Coats.

When I wrote the first childcare legislation since World War II, I did it with
Orrin Hatch -- not because I agreed with him on any other issue, but because I
knew in order to move our country forward we had to have leadership in this
country that understood the value of reaching out and finding common ground
with people.

So electability and the ability to govern and to do so immediately are
important, but don't discount the importance of electability. It's a very
important hurdle.


 Well, I would suggest here what Senator Byron Dorgan and I have offered twice in the last couple of years, and that was to say that any increase in price over $40 a barrel either to be reinvested in alternative energies or new exploration here, or provide a direct rebate to consumers across the country to reduce the costs that you've exactly described here, with these increases in the price of a barrel of oil. That would provide some immediate relief. Low- Income Energy Assistance and other programs, which I and others have championed over the years to provide assistance to those who are going to be in desperate conditions, with help as well. But that's the short-term answer to this problem. 

The longer-term answer's obviously how to stop what we do every single day,
and that is borrow a billion dollars every single day to buy foreign oil
offshore here. We ought to be moving more directly, obviously, to energy
independence here. I'd invite people to ChrisDodd.com to get a long, detailed
explanation of exactly how do that.


 Well, I think you've got to -- I find it somewhat startling here that Ronald Reagan's former secretary of State and George Bush's first economic -- chief economic adviser are, frankly, more courageous and bold on energy policy than my fellow competitors here for this job, the presidency. 

I've called for a corporate carbon tax. All of us share the same goals here of
achieving energy independence, reducing our dependency on fossil fuels and the
carbons they emit. But you're not going to achieve that unless you deal with
price, quite frankly, here. And there's a direct correlation between
continuing a policy that produces the CO2 emissions and the health hazards to
our country and the climate change problems here.

You've got to deal with price because, frankly, consumers are not going to be
in a position where they can afford the more expensive fuels, the alternative
fuels and technologies. So the corporate carbon tax, taxing carbon, is a
critical element if you're going to achieve this kind of energy change we need
in our country.

That directly bears on the kinds of problems we're seeing. There's no doubt in
my mind that there's a correlation between what you've just described, Brian,
and energy policy here, not to mention the national security and economic
security risks as a result of our continuing dependence on fossil fuels,
particularly oil out of the Middle East.

So those are things that I advocate that no one else does on this stage here
this evening. Al Gore has called it the most bold and honest plans. It's been
called the blue ribbon -- or the gold standard, rather, by any of the energy
policies that have been suggested by presidential candidates.

This is a major issue. It requires a hardship. A corporate carbon tax is not
without a cost to it. I understand that. But the status quo of continuing
borrowing a billion dollars every day to buy foreign oil, continuing the risk
to our country, I think is unacceptable. That's why I'm advocating it.


 Well, Brian, this is a -- I've often said the single most important issue, and I've been asked the question over the years, what's the single most important issue? I always say education because it is the answer to every other problem we confront as a people here. We've got to begin -- I'm proud to have been named as Senator of the Decade by the Head Start association. All the ideas that are being advocated -- early childhood education -- are critical. 

The federal government needs to be a better partner in all of this, not take
away control locally. But -- well, a child's quality of education shouldn't
depend on the accident of birth, and that's what happens too often in our
country. The children in Philadelphia or in Connecticut or whoever else are
going to be competing with children in Johannesburg, in Sydney, in Moscow and
Beijing. We need to make the kind of investments jointly with our local
communities. Higher education community colleges need to be more tuition free.
I have an idea on how to do that, so that we provide that continuum from the
earliest ages through higher education to meet the challenges of the 21st
century.


 Well, a couple of things, very quickly -- again, 30 seconds here. But first, obviously, providing some benefits to people who choose to get into that educational field and profession, so we can attract them to work in areas that they're needed in. That certainly needs to be done. 

I believe there's an answer to the medical malpractice issue, not the ones the
Republicans have been proposing, but that's one of the issues that people are
concerned about and, as part of a larger health care plan, ought to be a part
of that, as we consider universality and other elements here, to make sure
that this profession becomes one where the cost of insurance, the cost of
other items here are not going to be so excessive that you'd be discouraged
from going in that direction.


 This is a privilege. And look, I'm as forthright and progressive on immigration policy as anyone here, but we're dealing with a serious problem here, we need to have people come forward. The idea that we're going to extend this privilege here of a driver's license, I think, is troublesome. And I think the American people are reacting to it. 

We need to deal with security on our borders, we need to deal with the
attraction that draws people here, we need to deal fairly with those who are
here; but this is a privilege. Talk about health care, I have a different
opinion. That affects the public health of all of us. But a license is a
privilege, and that ought not to be extended, in my view.


 Wait a minute. No, no, no. You said yes, you thought it made sense to do it. 


 Well, that's a legitimate issue. But driver's license goes too far, in my view. 


 There's ways of dealing with that. 


 This is a privilege, not a right. 


 That's a bureaucratic nightmare. 


 Governor Spitzer's idea -- 


 Can I respond, I mean just why I think it ought to be? We're locking up too many people in our system here today. We've got mandatory minimum sentences that are filling our jails with people who don't belong there. My idea is to decriminalize this, reduce that problem here. We've gone from 800,000 to 2 million people in our penal institutions in this country. 

We've go to get a lot smarter about this issue than we are, and as president,
I'd try and achieve that.


 Well, let me pick up on this point here. I think, first of all, we Democrats have a job to do, and that is to unite this party, attract independents, Republicans who are seeking change to join us 12 months from now and elect a Democrat to the White House and to hold on to the House and Senate. That's number one. (Cheers, applause.) And it's going to take more than just getting people in our own party to support us. We're going to have to reach out. 

There's a shrillness to the debate. The American people want results. They
want the job done, exactly what Joe Biden talked about here. When people get
up in the morning and go to work, they sit around and they worry about their
jobs, their retirement, their health care, their kids' education, and they
wonder if anybody in Washington is paying any attention to them and whether or
not the job is being done on their behalf. And frankly, when a campaign is
about turning up the heat or who's angrier or who's yelling louder, the
American people turn off, in terms of listening. They want us to come
together. They want a president that can lead the country. We want a
Democratic candidate who can unite our party, and I think if we waste time on
the shrillness of this debate, then we lose the American people. So it's
important to focus on those.

Thank you. (Cheers, applause.)


 Absolutely yes. (Applause.) 


 Well, it's important to put it in context. Obviously, look, clarity is important here. The American people in a debate like this want clarity here, and certainly the whole idea of getting immigration reform, something I strongly support -- but I believe part of our job is to discourage those who want to come here. I understand why they want to come, but coming illegally creates serious problems, 4(00,000) to 500,000. 


 No, my belief is that giving a driver's -- as I've said from the very beginning here, I think driver's licenses are the wrong thing to be doing in terms of attracting people to come here as undocumented. 


 Well, I think if you define excelling by teachers who will go into poor rural or poor urban areas and make a difference, mentor children after school, put in extra time to make a difference, then I think that sort of merit pay has value. If you're judging excelling by determining whether or not that teacher has students who do better because they're in better neighborhoods or better schools, I'm totally opposed to that. That's not the way to be judging these matters. (Cheers, applause.) 

This is a -- this is critical. I always say this is the single most important
issue. I've been asked the question, over 26 years in the Senate, 1,000 times.
It's a very difficult question to answer: What's the most important issue?

This is the most important issue. Every other issue we grapple with depends
upon our ability to have the best educated generation we've ever produced.
(Applause.) And we need to have, in my view, far more cooperation at the
national level.

We spend less than 5 percent of the national budget on elementary and
secondary education. That is deplorable in my view. It's basically --
(applause). We need to fundamentally reform No Child Left Behind. No Child
Left Behind is a disaster for most schools and most people. (Cheers,
applause.)

I've spent -- I've spent 26 years in the Senate. I started the Children's
Caucus 26 years ago with Arlen Specter. I wrote the legislation dealing with
after-school programs, infant screening, autism issues as well. Spent a good
deal of my time -- I -- Head Start Senator of the Decade by the Head Start
Association. I've dedicated a good part of my public career to children and to
education, one-quarter of the population but truly 100 percent of our future.

This is an issue that deserves far more attention. We ought to have one single
debate on education. (Cheers, applause.) It comes up about once every two
hours of the discussion. (Applause.)


 Well, first of all, I hope -- maybe other people find it as ironic as I do to have President Bush urging the Turks not to invade the Kurdish areas of Iraq and lecturing Musharraf about restoring the constitution. This is an administration that has stepped all over our own Constitution in the process. (Applause.) 

And this isn't -- elections are -- there's an expression in Spanish that says
elections --


 Well, obviously national security, keeping the country safe. When you take the oath of office on January 20th -- 


 \-- you promise to do two things, and that is to protect and defend the Constitution of the United States and protect our country against enemies both foreign and domestic. The security of the country is number one, obviously, yes, all right? 


 Now secondly, this doesn't mean -- elections are only one note, as they say, in the tune of democracy here. Be careful what you wish for. If they were totally free elections in many of these countries we're talking about today, the Islamic jihad or the Islamic Brotherhood would win 85 percent of the vote. That's not a great outcome for us at this point here. 


 So we need to have a sense of balance about this here. 

I disagree with those who suggest here that we ought to condition Musharraf's
actions regarding some of these issues on aid and assistance here.

There's only one way in Afghanistan; it's through Pakistan. The generals in
the military control the nuclear weaponry here. We need to move and remind
Musharraf that there are obligations he needs to fulfill. Be careful here
about --


 Let me finish Musharraf, because literally, then you have to do what you say you're going to do. And if he doesn't do what he's suggesting, then you have to terminate that relationship, and that puts this country in a very, very dangerous position. 


 Well, first of all, look: I respect the fact that we're calling for timeouts, but as was pointed out earlier by John Edwards, we've had Senator Obama and Senator Clinton both came out in support of the Peruvian free trade agreement -- now switching our positions on these issues here for the convenience of a debate and discussion on where polling data may be. 

We are in a global economy. It is critically important that we do everything
we can to expand those markets so that our products and our services can be
sold in foreign nations here. It was outrageous in a sense here -- had a U.S.
corporation produced contaminated toys or food, they would have been shut down
in 20 minutes.

_MR. : Absolutely. _


 I called upon the president to put a moratorium on trade coming out of China when those products were announced to be contaminated. It should have stopped right then and there for eternity. (Applause.) 


 Oh, you are for it. 


 Okay. 


 Well, first of all -- (speaks in Spanish). (Cheers, applause.) 

I was in the Peace Corps in the Dominican Republic.

I argued at some points that fence, at certain places, you could make a case
that a wall might help; not across the entire border. I'm opposed to that, but
the idea of having some sort of better security, including additional guards,
additional technology here that would allow us to deal with the issues. But
there ought not to be any correlation here.

When you take the oath of office, you don't swear to uphold the Constitution
or protect the country. I believe by upholding our rights, we do protect the
country. And the administration has taken the opposite view. They're posing to
us the false choice, the dichotomy that to be safer, we have to give up
rights. I think that's so fundamentally flawed and fundamentally dangerous for
the United States of America to (embrace ?) that idea. (Applause.)


 Well, first of all, you want -- first of all, thanks for your question. 

Well, obviously you want people here that are going to have a balanced sense
of justice, to bring a life experience to that bench, where they're not just
there as academics, that have a clear record in the judicial branch, where
they either served as a judge or as a lawyer, where they've demonstrated that
ability to be fair and just when it comes to the administration of laws of our
country here.

I don't necessarily believe in applying litmus tests here. I think that's a
dangerous precedent to begin that process here. You start down that path,
others may follow. You end up with a court then that may lack that kind of
balance.

Now, obviously as someone who's pro-choice and have been, entire public life
and career, I feel very strongly about Roe versus Wade.

I would not want a justice to be appointed who would even think about
overturning that. (Applause.)

But I want to be very careful here -- I want to be careful about making sure
that I'd know the person, I'm not just looking at people I don't know or don't
understand their background, so I have a very good feel of where they're going
to be on these matters. (Inaudible) -- when they make the statement that they
will uphold precedent, and they raise their right hand before the Judiciary
Committee and make that commitment and then violate that commitment, that I
find highly offensive. That will not happen in a Dodd administration, I
promise you. (Applause.)




 I don't know why you bring that up. Bill Richardson, Hillary, Joe Biden and I, we're all about the same age. I don't think the white hair is an issue. 


 Hard work, I suppose. For example, it took me seven years to pass the Family and Medical Leave Act, and I helped to end wars in Central America and bring peace to Northern Ireland. I'm ready to be president. 


 Hundreds, thousands, I presume. 


 I'm Chris Dodd, and we approved this message. 

(END VIDEO CLIP)

(APPLAUSE)


 A young person with white hair, too? 


 Well, it's a great question, Morgan, to raise here. It, obviously, points to one of the most dark and shameful moments in recent past history in our country -- the fact that a major American city went through a natural disaster, and we found almost (ph) little to do. The American president had almost no response whatsoever to the people of that city, New Orleans. In fact, today still, the problem persists where people who had to move out of their city, move elsewhere, and little or no efforts to make sure they can get back in their homes. They have literally thousands of people whose homes were destroyed, their economic opportunities destroyed. 

I believe that had this occurred in a place with majorly a white population,
we would have seen a much more rapid response and a consistent response to
that issue. As an American president, we can never, ever allow again a major
city, a major population center in our country go through what New Orleans,
what the Gulf states did as a result of the kind of neglect from an American
president. As president, I would commit to do everything possible we bring to
bear the talents, the resources.

In fact, it should have been done ahead of time, to have a FEMA operation that
was prepared to respond to these predictable disasters. So it's a mark of
shame on our country. It ought to be reversed. It will in the Dodd
administration.

(APPLAUSE)


 I've made the case, Anderson, that -- my wife and I have two young daughters, age 5 and 2. I'd simply ask the audience to ask themselves the question that Jackie and I have asked: How would I want my two daughters treated if they grew up and had a different sexual orientation than their parents? Good jobs, equal opportunity, to be able to retire, to visit each other, to be with each other, as other people do. So I feel very strongly, if you ask yourself the question, "How would you like your children treated if they had a different sexual orientation than their parents?," the answer is yes. They ought to have that ability in civil unions. I don't go so far as to call for marriage. I believe marriage is between a man and a woman. But my state of Connecticut, the state of New Hampshire, have endorsed civil unions. I strongly support that. But I don't go so far as marriage. 


 First of all, there are differences here. The first responsibility of the commander in chief is to keep our nation safe and secure. It has been said from the very beginning: There is no military solution to this civil war in Iraq. 

I think it's incumbent upon the Congress.

There is a sense of disappointment. We should set that time certain. I don't
normally advocate that here, but I know of no other way we're going to
convince the political and religious leaders in Iraq to take seriously their
responsibility to decide to form a nation-state or not.

I think by saying with clarity here that we are withdrawing and redeploying
our forces out of there, robustly pursuing diplomacy, which we have not done
at all here. This administration treats statecraft and diplomacy as if it were
a gift to your opponents here.

We need to have a program here that allows us to become much more engaged in
the region.

The answer on Darfur isn't just what we do...


 Well, no, because Iraq is related to Darfur, Anderson, here. It's because we're bogged down there at $10 billion a month, we've lost our moral leadership in the world. No one listens to us when it comes to foreign policy. That has to change in this country. That's the difference here. 

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, yes, I think they should, in a sense. I'm opposed to a draft, but I think if you're going to have registration, it ought to be across lines so you don't just ask one gender to do the -- have the responsibility. So in my view that would be the fair thing to do. 

I happen to believe, by the way, Anderson, and taking the question here a bit
further, and it's a good question that Tony has raised, I'm an advocate of
universal nation service, not by mandating it, but one of the things I'm
missing in our country is the shared experience.

I served in the National Guard, I served in the reserves, I served in the
Peace Corps in Latin America back in the '60s here. I want to see every
American given the opportunity to serve their country in some way.

I think we need to do more of that in the United States today. Elections ought
to be more than just about a series of issues, but the shared experiences of
service.

(APPLAUSE)

It's so important that every American have that opportunity. It's something I
strongly advocate and would advocate as president.


 I have advocated, again, that we have our troops out by April of next year. I believe that the timeframe is appropriate to do that. I would urge simultaneously that we do the things we've talked about here, and that is pursue the diplomatic efforts in the region to at least provide Iraq the opportunity to get on its feet. But I believe our military ought to be out before that. 

If I'm president in January, I'd be advocating a responsible withdrawal that's
safe for our troops who are there, to provide the resources for them to do it.

As I mentioned earlier, I served with the National Guard and Reserves. My
brother served in the military as well. So, in my family, there have been at
least two that I'm aware of. I have first cousins of mine that were submarine
commanders. My uncle was a commander in World War II in the Navy. So there
have been a number of people in my family.


 Well, no, I've argued that it actually happen before then. I've been pushing... 


 There were 11 of us back when the supplemental bill came up a few weeks ago that voted to cut off that funding here. There's no other way I know to bring this to a head than through that mechanism. So come January, I hope that would be completed. 

(APPLAUSE)

But, if not, then I'd advocate a time frame that would be done responsibly.


 My daughter goes to the public school as a pre-school -- kindergarten. But I want to come back to the No Child Left Behind. 


 Because I think remedying this -- and I understand the applause here -- accountability is very important. This is one country -- we've got to have the best prepared generation of Americans that we've ever produced in our educational system. No other issue, in my view, is as important as this one here. 

And getting the No Child Left Behind law right is where we ought to focus our
attention here so that we have resources coming back to our states. You
measure growth in a child. You invest in failing schools. But I would not
scrap it entirely. Accountability is very important in this country. We ought
not to abandon that idea.


 Anderson, there are a number of things. The 50-mile-per- gallon standard is something I've advocated by 2017, that I would push hard for. Entire fleet of federal automobiles would be hybrids or electric automobiles, so we reduce even further out consumption. 

But I believe I'm the only candidate here, along with Al Gore, who's called
for that, is a corporate carbon tax. You've got to tax polluters. You've got
to separate the price differential so that we can move away from fossil fuels
that do so much damage to our environment, to our economy, to our future, to
jobs in this country.

Until you deal with the issue of price, until you impose a corporate carbon
tax, we will never get away from fossil fuels. It's the only way this can be
achieved. You have to advocate that if you're serious about global warming.


 I drive a hybrid, we have a hybrid, and we use efficient light bulbs in our homes... 


 I have two young daughters who I'm trying to educate them. 

I don't think I could live on the minimum wage, but I'm a strong advocate to
seeing to it that we increase it at least to $9 or $10 to give people a chance
out there to be able to provide for their families.


 That's leadership in the country. 


 Not that well, I'll tell you, Barack. 


 I don't disagree with that. I think frankly this is an issue that comes to a head, as we all know, by the year 2040. 

Obviously, I think it would be important to start to address the issue.
Certainly, we have no ideas, and I would be totally opposed to the
privatization of Social Security. That is a very bad idea and I am glad we
rejected it.

But one of the ideas is to raise that level above $97,000.


 I would support that. That is one of the solutions that would make a lot of sense to me to make the trust fund whole. 


 First of all, I hope all of us get a chance to comment on this issue. This is a huge issue that deserves the attention and every candidate here ought to have the chance to talk about health care. 

(CROSSTALK)


 First of all, the woman with the Alzheimer's issue -- stem cell research. Under a Dodd administration, stem cell research will be conducted so they can deal with diabetes. 

(APPLAUSE)

Regarding the family that's talking about diabetes, 49 percent of our school
districts have exclusive contracts with soft drink companies and junk food
companies because we're not funding enough in our education system.

(APPLAUSE)

That's an obesity problem as well.


 It would. People who live in this country -- children certainly would be covered. And I'm in support of the immigration policy here that requires them to contribute so that... 


 If they're paying part of that thing, then they also get covered. Because, frankly, I don't want them contributing disease problems and health issues to the rest of the... 


 I like John Edwards. I love his wife Elizabeth and his family, and I think we've had enough of negative in politics. I have nothing negative to say about the gentleman. 

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, again, I'd certainly underscore the point that Senator Clinton has made here. The point I'd make on that, when I disagreed with my colleague from Illinois, was about the issue of whether or not a speech, a prepared speech, which suggested here a hypothetical situation and a hypothetical solution here -- that raised serious issues within Pakistan. 

As I pointed out before, the only person that separates us from a jihadist
government in Pakistan with nuclear weapons is President Musharraf. And,
therefore, I thought it was irresponsible to engage in that kind of a
suggestion here. That's dangerous. Words mean something in campaigns.

And so I think it's an important distinction to make here. We're asking
Democrats across the country to choose amongst us here who is best able to
lead.

The experience, the background, the demonstrated success in dealing with both
domestic and foreign policy issues are critical questions. You're not going to
have time in January of '09 to get ready for this job.

You've got to be ready immediately for it and bringing back the experience
over the years to deal with these issues, as I have, both on the Foreign
Relations Committee, dealing with every major foreign policy debate -- sitting
there working with children and family issues over the last quarter of the
century -- I think demonstrated a background and an experience and ability
with proven success to deal with the issues...


 Well, look, first of all, I find this sort of situational ethics here. I mean, over the years, the fine people taking money from one group or the other were sort of competing with each other as to which group is a good or bad group here. 

The fact of the matter is: I've been supporting, for years and years, public
financing of federal offices.


 That's what needed in this country. 

(APPLAUSE)

We're never going to solve this problem, unless we move in that direction.

(APPLAUSE)

And, certainly, it's not only the money you take, but what are you doing? How
are you casting your votes? Where were you on bankruptcy? Where were you on
dealing with the estate tax reform?

Those critical questions that affect people in this country are very important
considerations. But public financing is where we need to be.

And let me point out as well, George, here, if I may as well here, it's about
getting this job done. We don't elect a king or a queen or a dictator in
November, we elect a president. The margins are thin. No one political party
is going to write all of this. It takes leadership that knows how to bring
people together.

It's what I've done for 26 years. When I wrote the Family and Medical Leave
Act -- three presidents, two vetoes to go through in seven years. But I
brought Republicans to the table around a Democratic principle.

The idea we're going to go down there, any one of us is elected president, and
write all the rules and decide what it's going to be is not the case. It's not
how it happens.

We need leadership that's been tested and proven to bring success between the
political parties to get the job done for America.


 That's the kind of leadership that's needed in 2008. 


 I agree with what Hillary has just said here. I would not want to try and second-guess the lord's intentions here and to assume that part of his great plan includes some of these actions we see, for a variety of different reasons, here. 


 And the power of prayer I think is important to all of us. I hope it is, recognizing that we don't do anything without His approval. 


 Well, George, listen, one of the areas we've got to have is a Justice Department that starts dealing with some of the antitrust issues in our country. It just doesn't cover agriculture, but also a variety of other things, including media concentration here. 

The ability today of just concentrating power, allowing so much to be
accumulated, is making it very difficult for the kind of independents and
smaller interests, including small business and small farmers, to be able to
grow and to have the kind of economic success they'd like to have.


 Rural America needs additional attention, as well, here. I'm a great believer that we need to extend the broadband access to our rural communities. 

Opportunity shouldn't require that you leave rural America to come to
opportunity, but opportunity ought to be able to come to rural America, by
taking advantage of the technologies we have today, so that people can stay on
these farms and stay in rural parts of our country, including Iowa.


 Well, I'll tell you one issue that I wish I had done more on, recently. And, I think, maybe one of the worst votes cast in the Congress, maybe in the last 20 years, was last fall, on the Military Commissions Act, in which we allowed the abandonment of habeas corpus, returning to torture, and abandoning the Geneva Convention. 

I thought about filibustering that bill, and I didn't do it. I regret that
deeply. I can't think of a worse vote we cast, to walk away from the
Constitution of the United States.

(APPLAUSE)

And I'm committed, on January 20, to bring that...

(APPLAUSE)


 I wouldn't use that approach. What I've suggested here -- this is a huge issue here. We've got to reexamine our whole education process, from beginning to the top here, and I'm a believer that we need to have fundamental reform of No Child Left Behind, and start measuring growth, not abandoning schools that aren't doing well, and providing far less rigid criteria when it comes to highly qualified teachers. 

Where I would like to go here is see that we apply additional resources to
teachers who will go into the tougher schools in rural or urban America, where
they need better teachers coming in, and provide some additional incentives
for them, including pay and including the criteria that they have to meet to
do so.

But I'm not in favor necessarily of giving more preference for a teacher
that's performing somewhat better. Measuring that I think is the wrong
direction we're going in.


 Taking snapshots of schools and teachers and students is not measuring how we're doing here. We need a far better approach on No Child Left Behind. I'm offering those ideas. The idea of discriminating one group of teachers against another in that regard, I think is a huge mistake and I'd oppose it. 

(APPLAUSE)


 Yes, I think it will happen in September. But we also need more liquidity. And they ought to be allowing Fannie and Freddie Mac to put more liquidity in the market. 

It has seized up. You can't get a mortgage in America today.


 Well, there were two moments. One was the decision to join the Peace Corps, getting excited about John Kennedy inviting a generation of us to be a part of things larger than ourselves. 


 And the second was, about a week before my father died, when he was asked the question, "Had he known how his life would end, would he do it all over again?," I'll never forget him saying he'd do it in a minute, because you can never do as much for the public good as you can through a public life. 


 Well, Tim, I -- the question is not just how you bring the troops out, but why are we there? As president of the United States, your first responsibility is to guarantee the safety and security of the American people. And so the question you must ask yourself as president: Is the continuation of our military presence enhancing that goal? 

I happen to believe very strongly that this policy of ours, militarily (sic)
involvement in Iraq, is counterproductive. We're less safe, less secure, more
vulnerable and more isolated today as a result of the policy. So I believe
that we ought to begin that process of redeployment here.

I would simultaneously engage in the kind of robust diplomacy that's been
totally missing from this administration, to enhance our own interests in the
region as well as to provide some additional security for Iraq. You can do
this, Tim. Practically, it can be done, by military planners -- can tell you
-- you can move a brigade to a brigade to a brigade and half, maybe even two a
month out of Iraq. So the time frame we're talking about is critical.

But Congress has an obligation here. It's not enough that we just draft
timetables. The Constitution gives the Congress of the United States a unique
power, and that is the power of the purse. As long as we continue drafting
these lengthy resolutions and amendments here, talking about timelines and
dates, we're not getting to the fundamental power that exists in the Congress.

And that is to terminate the funding of this effort here, give us a new
direction. As everyone who's looked at this issue over the last two or three
years have concluded, there is no military solution here, and we need to do
far more to protect our interests not only in that region, but throughout the
world. We're not doing it with this policy.


 I will get that done. 


 Yes, I will, sir. 


 From Iraq. 


 Well, I think we're going to have that opportunity over and over again in the coming days. There's going to be a request, I think, for something in the neighborhood of $200 billion that the administration's going to seek to continue to prosecute the war. So we'll have our chances to do it. 

I think it's a little unrealistic to assume every single day you do that,
Mike, but certainly you can do this when the opportunity arises.

And that, Tim, is the point I was trying to make to you at a moment ago here.
We need to be understanding what powers exist in the institution of the
Congress, those of us who serve there, and use that opportunity to do what the
Constitution's given us. And that is to stop the funding. That's what we need
to be doing.

Now look, I realize you may not get 60 votes or even 51 votes for this. But I
think clarity and leadership are called for at this hour here. If you're going
to seek the presidency of the United States and you're in a position today to
do something about this, then it's -- in my view, it's the opportunity to
stand up and lead on this issue, to bring this war, which is doing great
damage to our country, to a halt. It's hurting our nation terribly, and it
needs to be brought to a halt. The power of the purse allows you to do that.


 I think in certain circumstances you have to here to get -- New Haven, Connecticut was a good example here, where there was a cooperative effort with the local police departments and others to deal with health issues, crime problems and the like. The immigration service came in and raided, basically, homes in that community causing a great deal of disruption, disrupting the relationship that was being developed with community leaders, including the local police, and dealing with matters in that community. 

We need to step back. What's been said by Bill Richardson and Joe Biden is
correct here. This was a failure of leadership again at the national level. We
had an opportunity to draft an immigration law here that would have put us on
the right track. I certainly endorse everything Bill's said here in terms of
the provision -- I think all of us do here -- the general provisions.

We're a nation of immigrants here. We have succeeded in no small measure
because we have been a welcoming people here. We also understand we cannot
tolerate 400 to 500,000 people coming to this country as undocumented workers
each year. We need to have a far better system in place that stops that flow
coming in, to deal with the 12 to 20 million who are here illegally. If in the
meantime here, we're dealing with children, we're dealing with crime problems,
we're dealing with health issues at the local community, then you need to
allow these local communities to do that.

If it means temporarily engaging in a sanctuary protection here, then so be it
if that protects our country. In the meantime, we need to have national
leadership, a president that would be able to bring together the Congress and
pass the kind of immigration laws that we frankly don't have on the books
today.


 Well, if I were Hillary Clinton, I'd be very worried. 


 This is the same guy who said, "Way to go, Brownie," here. (Laughter, applause.) And I think "mission accomplished" was the other one I saw. So in terms of being a prognosticator of events, I'd say the president has somewhat of a bad record when it comes to that. 

But certainly we all respect and admire Hillary and can understand that as
well. But this race is going to be won by voters here in this state and Iowa
and other caucus and primary states. Making predictions in September or August
about who's going to win later on, I think, has proven to be rather faulty
over the years. So I look very much forward to the kind of race that develops.

I said -- I walked in here this evening, and a fellow walked up to me and he
said, "Anderson Cooper, what's happened to you here?" (Laughter.) So I
realized I have some gaining of ground to do here, but nonetheless, I'm
counting on the American people. Democrats make a good choice in the coming
months, not the president of the United States predicting the winner in the
Democratic primary. MR. RUSSERT: But your statement said, "I can understand
why the president would want Senator Clinton." Why does George Bush want
Senator Clinton to be the nominee of the party? That's what you said.


 Well, being somewhat facetious Tim, obviously -- 


 And the question here of whether or not you're actually trying to in a sense encourage a certain outcome here. And we all believe we'd be the best candidates. I certainly do, based on 26 years of working on every major domestic and foreign policy issue of our country, having proven to get results for our nation, having authored the Family and Medical Leave Act, child care legislation, dealing in Latin America, dealing with financial services. I think people want not only promises about what you'll do, but a proven record of what you've been able to accomplish. 


 I don't think you have to go that far. I understand what Joe's point is here, but you could raise that tax far less than all incomes here and achieve the same result by achieving solvency. 

But beyond just the Social Security fix, Tim, there are a host of other issues
related to this. Pension security is critically important for long-term
security. Financial literacy is critically important to people as well.
Prescription drug issues are critically important to that population,
preventive care. We need to look at doctors in a holistic way when it comes to
our seniors.

Remember, it was only a few years ago, Tim, that the poorest sector of our
population in this country were our elderly. Because of Medicare, because of
Social Security, because of leadership that stood up and fought for it here,
we've been able to take the older Americans out of poverty and give them a
sense of decency and a quality of life.

So issues like privatization, as been said here, have to be off the table, and
I believe you can achieve that solvency here by doing simpler things without
the draconian measures that some have suggested. But you need to also deal
with these other issues on the table if you're going to provide that kind of
financial security and that quality of life for our older Americans.


 Well, John -- 


 Can I -- 


 And I thank you. 

What I was suggesting here -- Joe, I think, said we tax everybody. I -- he
clearly --


 \-- that you don't have to do that. (Laughter.) 

(Chuckling.) I'm sure you would, Joe.


 And -- and -- but you could do this by basically readjusting that tax so you don't have to -- doesn't have to affect everyone in society. 

So, John, I'm not suggesting it just be --


 But you've got to raise it up, clearly, to do this. 

Let me also say something, look, because all of this comes down to one other
issue, Tim, clearly. Joe made the point earlier. We can all talk about this.
No one political party is going to do this. It's going to take people who can
bring people together to get the job done. And you need to demonstrate not
just the experience but the proven ability to actually get results by bringing
people together to do things that were difficult to accomplish. That's what
I've done for 26 years. I know how to do this. And I think the American people
are looking for leadership that -- not just make promises about what they're
going to do, but the ability to bring elements together, as you had happen
with Ronald Reagan and Tip O'Neill and Bob Dole and Pat Moynihan. That kind of
leadership is missing today. That's what the American people want back.


 Three thousand kids start smoking every day in this country. 


 You never got to the real round. 


 I've advocated -- (inaudible). 


 if you promise not to tell my children, I will. (Laughter.) Certainly. Look, I advocated this some time ago here. We would shut down a company in this country in 20 minutes if they were using excessive lead paint, sending toothpaste and animal food to this country that was contaminated and causing great harm and danger to people here. The idea that the president would not suspend the importation of those products to our country I think was terribly wrong-headed. And certainly I would advocate that that be done until we have the guarantees of security. And beyond this issue, we ought to establish in this country, given the amount of products we now bring into this country offshore, that there is some sort of ability here to make some judgment about the safety and security of these products coming in, certainly before they leave their country. So I would certainly do that. 


 Yes, I do. 


 Not that I disagree, but this was all part of the Military Commissions Act which was adopted last fall. 


 There were only a handful of us that voted against it at the time. And I've written legislation to overturn it. I'll offer no better witness here than John McCain, who said that during those terrible years he was incarcerated and tortured, he would say anything to those interrogators in order to stop the physical pain. So we need to reinforce the idea here; this is a dreadful way to collect information. 

We need to do other things to make sure it happens. But walking away from
international conventions, as we did with the Geneva Conventions to disallow
the restrictions on torture, I think, is a mistake, and also to walk away from
habeas corpus.

But leadership requires you try and do something about it. And I'm doing
something about it by trying to get the Congress to overturn that
legislation...


 The Good Samaritan would be a worthwhile sort of description of who we all ought to be in life. 


 What is it now, Bill? Come on. 


 Sox. And tomorrow night you're going to be hosting a debate in Red Sox nation. RUSSERT: Yes. 

Biden?


 Who's going to be the president of Red Sox nation? We all want to tune into that one. 


 Well, again, this is 16 agencies that have drawn this conclusion. It wasn't just one. So it's a very compelling case that's been made here for exercising caution in pursuing what I've advocated and others have as well, and that is pursuing as much of a diplomatic solution to the problems that Iran poses -- and there are some. It would be foolish to say otherwise here. 

But the important point is we can't do this unilaterally. And that's one of
the dangers here. If we merely try to impose sanctions by ourselves, or other
such efforts here, they will fail. It's very important to understand the
linkage, obviously, not only between Iran, but Iraq and Iran, and our ability
to build this kind of international support for efforts to convince Iran on a
variety of issues to move in a different direction is being seriously
compromised by our continued military presence in Iraq.

So there needs to be not only understanding what's written in this report, but
simultaneously understanding that that universe -- that more multilateral
approach is going to be hobbled and difficult, as long as we find ourselves
bogged down in the Iraq situation.


 Well, certainly, under what circumstance we're talking about here, I think the vote in September is very important. We're all seeking to be the nominee of our party, seeking the presidency. 


 I am. 

That's very important because it was a -- there are only about 20 of us here
-- Senator Biden and myself were the only two on this table here that were
confronted with that vote that voted against it, along with Senator Lugar, I
might point, Senator Chuck Hagel and others -- Jim Webb -- who felt that this
was -- the language of the resolved clause in that resolution, that nonbinding
resolution, specifically eliminated any option except the military one.

And that kind of framework is exactly the thing you're going to hear back
again, in my view, and the danger involved.


 Those critical moments come periodically, but it demonstrates leadership on a critical issue such as this one. 


 Well, this is long-standing. In the immediate aftermath of 9/11, we had -- there were, I think, classified ads in the Washington Post trying to find if there was anyone in the region who spoke Arabic. 

This has been a vacuum for a long time, in terms of our relationship with the
Muslim world -- the 22 countries in the world that are Muslim nations. We've
been, basically, AWOL dealing with these nations here and that has bred a lack
of understanding and appreciation -- the point I think that Barack was trying
to make here.

But also, over these last six years, despite this effort over the last few
days in Annapolis, where has this administration been on the Middle East
issues here? They are connected in many ways here.

It appears, definitely, that we're sort of -- just that we're not engaged at
all. Over the past years, both Republican and Democratic administrations have
made it a part of their agenda to stay engaged, to make it clear that we're an
honest broker trying to resolve the issue of Israel's security, as well as the
legitimate issue of Palestinians seeking an independent state.

We've walked away from that. And that -- that absence of our participation, as
well as our failure to understand and to try and have a better for what the
culture of the Muslim world is, I think, has created the very environment you
talked about.


 Well, I want to go back to the characterization of the relationship. Obviously, it's a strategic one. But this is not a competition. If it were a competition, competition implies that people are playing by the same rules. We're not playing by the same rules here. This is an adversarial relationship today. That needs to change. 

But when you manipulate your currency, as they do, in violation of the World
Trade Organization here, to the tune of 40 percent, you've immediately created
a huge disadvantage for our country.

When you employ slave labor in the production of your manufactured goods, when
you deny access on your shelves to the products and services we produce, it is
not a competition. It's adversarial.

Now, I'm not interested in being bellicose about this, but you need to
understand exactly what the relationship is today before we decide what steps
you take.

We ought to be -- not raising our voice in a loud necessarily way, but we
ought to be able to talk about that we need to stand up and say, This is a
market you want to be in. If you want to be here, then you're going to have to
play like an adult here, if you're going to continue following policies that
allow you to manipulate your currency, produce goods that you sell in our
marketplace that do damage to our consumers.

When we got word that they were sending toys over here with lead paint in
them, cat food and toothpaste here, the president had the authority
immediately to suspend importation. He wouldn't do it.

Had that been a U.S. corporation doing that, their doors would have been shut
in 20 minutes.


 My toys are coming from Iowa. 

(LAUGHTER)


 I'm buying Iowa toys. They're going to eat Iowa foods. 

(LAUGHTER)

(CROSSTALK)


 No, no. I wish the Senate would have reconsidered when I offered legislation on lead paint, for instance, here to try and reduce the kind of problems that Karen has talked about. 

I have a child that has serious food allergies here. I know what it's like
every day to read a label every single day because my child could die if she
consumed the wrong products here.

Eighty percent of the food we consume in this country's imported and only 1
percent of it is inspected. And there's no country of labeling on those
products here. And you'll have 10 different descriptions of an egg here, and
that's very difficult, if not impossible, for women like Karen. And parents
who have children have to be careful about the products they consume.


 Well, I think there's an ongoing situation. I want to commend, at this point here, people like Nancy Pelosi and others who, just recently, when the Dalai Lama was here, presented him with a gold medal. We raised the issue, not often enough, on Tibet and what's happened with the almost-genocidal behavior, when dealing with this remarkable culture that's been under assault. 

And the idea that we'd recognize him and welcome him here as a religious
leader in the world is exactly the kind of symbol we need to send.

We're talking here about a lot of things we would do to be tougher in China.
It's also important to understand a balance is necessary here. China is
acquiring massive natural resources, that you raised earlier, around the
world.

They have huge energy issues. Twenty-five million people a year move from
rural China to urban China. We ought to be working with them in various areas
on energy policy, environmental policy as well.

So I don't want this to be seen, as we discuss this today here, only just
about the acrimonious or the difficult or the tough positions we're going to
take, but to make them recognize that the Dalai Lama is an international
religious leader who's worthy of recognition.

And if they, as they apparently did, threaten to deny some ships to be able to
move in waters off China over that, they need to understand this isn't going
to change in a Democratic administration.


 No, I haven't, actually. 


 Nice try. 

(LAUGHTER)


 Check it out, very thoroughly. Yes. 


 Well, I think you've got an obligation here to go beyond that if you have any doubts or questions here. People who knowingly hire undocumented workers I think need to be held accountable to a far higher degree of penalties -- civil and possibly criminal, if, in fact, it's widespread -- because these are the things that are going to slow down -- the 400,000 to 500,000 people who come here each year. 

You know, I understand -- look, I think this debate has to begin some place.
I'm very worried about the fear and hate-mongers out there who are going to
divide this country very terribly on this subject matter.

We've been a welcoming people for the entire history of our nation here. There
were exceptions in the 19th century with the know- nothings and at the end of
World War I, which were dangerous periods here.

But, obviously, any self-respecting country has to control its borders and has
to impose penalties that would otherwise attract people to come here;
understanding why they want to be here, but also understanding our capacity
and ability to handle this.

That's why I've taken the strong position here of doing whatever we can on
both sides of the border, and I've worked at this for a long time. For 20
years, I've chaired the inter-parliamentary with Mexico. I speak the language
fluently.

We have a large percentage of people coming from Latin America. We passed the
CAFTA trade agreement here. You want to go right to the heart of these things
here.

We allowed every single country under CAFTA to be able to set its own labor
standard. Exactly what happens is businesses locate there and race to the
bottom.

Instead of improving the quality of working conditions that would give people
in these countries a chance to stay in their own nations, which most of them
would prefer to do, we're encouraging people to come here by not having
trading agreements that don't insist upon...


 They are. 


 I think both of you are right. The Pew statistics I think more recent arrivals, and that number is higher coming from Latin America. Overall, Joe's point, the people going back years here, would include a larger number coming from non-Latin American countries. 

So both numbers may be accurate. Just depends how you frame it.


 Just a couple of points. And that point that Barack just made is very important. This is a failure of leadership by this administration to step in at critical moments when we could have gotten something done. 

We need to also recognize there are people at this very hour that are showing
up at U.S. embassies all over the world who are seeking to come here through
legal means, and we need to keep them in mind. If it looks as though they're
fools to be doing what they're doing, because we're creating virtually an
amnesty program in this country, then you're going to have an awful problem
around the world.

So we need to understand that.

And, thirdly, this point. Look, let's understand this. The Republicans, the
extreme conservatives here, want this issue on the table. They don't want to
talk about the war in Iraq. They don't want to talk about the failure of
fiscal policies here at home. They don't want to talk about what's going on
with health care in the country. So they're going to use this issue as a wedge
issue here to inflame the passions, the fears and hatreds of too many
Americans.

We've see it in the past in our country. It's dangerous politics. And we need
to describe it for what it is.


 Health care would be a good example of that as well. 

(CROSSTALK)

(LAUGHTER)


 Dennis said something important. I believe -- and I'm probably maybe the only candidate here who speaks fluently a second language -- Bill Richardson isn't here today... 


 The point is, you need to be, I think, enriching this. Paul Simon, a former colleague in the United States Senate, wrote a book called The Tongue Tied Americans. 

And understand, what I mentioned at the outset of this debate about having to
run classified ads to find Arabic speakers at the time after 9/11 is an
indication that we need to be talking more about that.

And clearly, as Joe, as you said, this is a source of our wealth and richness,
is this country. We have so benefited as a result of people who come here
because of religious, political persecution, seeking a better life for their
families.

This has been a great source of strength for our country. We need to work with
it, obviously, be practical about. But this is a source of pride in our
country.


 Not something to be talked about in negative terms. 


 That's right. 


 I would say the single largest issue in many ways for us to grapple with is education, because it's the heart of who we are, both in terms of our governance and economic strength in the future. And convincing everyone in the country the importance and the priority of that issue is something that I think is going to be critical to the success of our country in the 21st century. 


 Well, listen, the federal government's much different than a state government, I say respectfully to Bill Richardson here. It's much more complicated and diverse. 

I've been a strong supporter, authored, in fact, pay-as-you-go budgets back in
the early 1980s, here in the Reagan administration, which failed, I might add;
was a strong supporter of Gramm-Rudman- Hollings, which is designed as well to
inject some fiscal discipline into the process.

But what we need to be doing is growing our economy, giving people a sense of
confidence and optimism again that we're dealing with some of the deep,
underlying problems that have caused their earning power to decline by almost
a thousand dollars over the last six years.

Health care costs have gone up 87 percent. Energy costs continue to rise. The
cost of higher education -- the cost right here at the University of Iowa has
gone up 141 percent the last six or seven years.

So we need to have an economy here that's driving to growth, creating jobs,
which is the best social program anyone ever created, with a sense of optimism
here. And then, simultaneously, as you grow and deal with the underlying waste
that's occurred, bring an end to the war in Iraq, which costs us $10 billion
every month, that we can begin to put that discipline back into our process
which all Americans are looking for.


 Again, I try to frame this in the context of what's fair, what's responsible and what's pro-growth. We've got to grow as well in this country here. 

And one of the constituencies that's suffering the most, the middle class,
falling further and further behind. We've got some 37 million of our fellow
citizens who are living in poverty; about 12 million or 13 million are
children.

One of the things I've done over the years is try to expand the child tax
credit here, which takes some 2.5 million children out of poverty.


 The Earned Income Tax Credit ought to be extended further. 

So, you know, lift people up, as well, here, by providing the opportunities
for them to get out of the difficulties they're in economically and have an
opportunity to grow, provide those -- fill those jobs that need in our
country, change our trade policies here.

But growing the economy -- too often, I think, Democrats are just associated
with tax increases and not growing the economy and not investing in the growth
of nation, which I've been committed to for 26 years in the Senate.


 Well, my colleagues have talked about China being a competitor. Competitors normally are operating under the same rules. 


 I don't mind competing with someone, but as long as we're all operating by the same rules. 

This is more of an adversarial relationship. It has to be identified as such.

When you have the Chinese government, as they just did, even make it more
difficult for us to access even entertainment; not to mention, of course, the
intellectual property theft that goes on on a daily basis; here you're still
using slave labor; you manipulate your currency to give you a 40 percent
advantage over our manufacturers and our people working in this country here;
that's no longer just a competitor. That's a very different relationship.

Now, it's obviously important not to get bellicose. I agree with Bill.
Obviously this is very important relationship for us in the 21st century.

But I think Americans are tired of this conversation, somehow, that it's
business as usual. It's not.

We don't have the same access to their shelves, to our services that we'd like
to sell in their country. They're very, very restrictive here.

We need to get a lot tougher on this -- fair -- not loud, but fair, if we're
going to have a better relationship. Or before long, this will no longer be
the most desirous market for them and we will have disadvantaged our country
substantially.

This is a major, major issue that needs to be addressed with a lot more
thoughtfulness than it's getting today.


 Well, I go back and, again, talking timing, the Harkin amendment adopted a number of years ago, back when we thought human rights in the Carter administration had some value. He was a strong supporter of it then. 

Then we walked away from it. We paid a price for it.

Too often people identify and think that human rights and security are
composing (sic) interests here. They're actually the same interest.


 Our job is supposed to advance the security of our country. We do it in no better and stronger fashion than by talking about these universal rights which we embrace in this country here. 

So, it ought to be part of the seamless conduct of our foreign policy, not on
some ad hoc basis where we apply it one place but not another.

It needs to be understood at the very beginning from my presidency here that
if you're going to do business with the United States, human rights is
fundamentally important. We care about it, the world cares about.

And that's one way to enhance our reputation, restore our footing and moral
authority in the world here by insisting that this be a part of that seamless
conduct of the nation's foreign policy.


 Carolyn, can I just mention one thing here, by the way? 

Just last evening, thanks to colleagues here, I authored legislation on
sanctions on Darfur -- economic. It passed unanimously through the United
States Senate last night. So there's some good news on these issues, and it's
happening very quickly.


 Well, first of all, you're starting here. You've had wonderful efforts here. Governor Vilsack started, Governor Culver with the power fund he adopted with the state legislature this year. It's a great step forward. 


 One state making a difference. 

We're borrowing a billion dollars every single day to buy foreign oil -- a
billion dollars every day. We're not going to wish ourselves out of this
problem here. I'm the only candidate on this forum here who's advocated a
corporate carbon tax.

Now, I'm fully aware of the implications of suggesting a tax. But it's not
enough to state the goals. We've got to have the courage to stand up and tell
you how you get their.

And until you deal with the price differentials here, cheaper fuel is always
going to win out, unfortunately. So you need to be able to tax this carbon,
which is killing us and killing this planet.

And I'm pleased that Al Gore, Bill Bradley have called our plan the most
honest and bold of the energy plans here. This is the best gift our generation
can give to the next. But, if we're not honest about it and talk about it,
it's going to be nothing more than a lot of speeches and nothing much will
change.


 I would have voted for it. I think Tom Harkin's been doing a terrific job in changing the direction -- the reforms in agriculture. 

And the idea of encouraging more conservation, being good custodians of the
land -- I often pointed out here as I travel around the state -- the people
have reminded me that Iowa represents as much as 10 percent, maybe more, of
the most fertile land in the world here. And the generation of Iowans here,
all of us bear responsibility to see to it that this incredible world global
resource is going to be preserved and protected.

So moving in a direction here that encourages the diversity of farming in the
state, I think, makes a great deal of sense. It encourages conservation and
alternative uses, ones that all of us ought to support, not only Iowans but
across this country so that we preserve this very valuable resource for fiber,
food and energy as you're developing here in this state.


 Well, first of all, thank you, Carolyn. 

First of all, let me begin by, on behalf of Jackie and my children, thanking
Iowans. We've been warmly and graciously received here over the last number of
months and we're very grateful to the state for all of that.

One of the things I try to do in this campaign is to talk about positive ideas
and also about results here. Because I think Iowans, like other Americans,
want to know not only what you're going to do, but give us some sense of
confidence and optimism that you've got a record of actually achieving ideas
that brings people together: Republicans, Democrats, independents.

It's what I've done for 26 years, as the author of the Family Medical Leave
Act, the first children's caucus, working to bring Democrats and Republicans
together.

I'm a former Peace Corps volunteer and I served in the military. I'm the only
candidate to have done both those -- both those public service. And we believe
very strongly that that kind of background and history contributes as well to
the decision-making that a president must make.

So on January 3rd, we ask for your vote. This isn't about wealth or celebrity;
it's about choosing the best candidate who can win and who will lead our
country.


 I've been asked probably a thousand times, "What's the single most important issue?" 


 It's not a very fair question, I suppose, given the importance of many issues. 

But the answer I've given a thousand times is education. It's the key to
everything who we are: not only economically, individually and collectively,
but our system of governance depends upon an educated population. And too
often the accident of birth has determined the quality of your education.

I want to underscore what Barack just said. I agree with him totally. We've
got to begin with parents. Parents are the first teachers, and too often we
have 37 million people living in poverty and 12 million of those children,
they don't ever get the right start.

I come from a family of teachers. One of my sisters just retired after 41
years teaching in the inner city of Hartford.

It is staggering what's happening to these kids. So it's going to take
leadership in the country that talks about this, not just occasionally, but
every single day, the importance of this underlying question as to who we are
as a people.


 It's going to be -- it's going to be a long year, I can see, now. 

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)

The first thing I'd try and do, look, is change the discourse, the shrillness
of the discussion in this country.

We're divided as a country, as we're (inaudible) here, by the political
leadership. That has to change. Every other subject matter we're talking about
depends upon having a president that will change the nature of our
conversation.

We care about the same things. We want the same things. We've got leadership
that appeals to the divisions, not the unity we all feel as Americans.


 I've said the very first day, I'll do whatever I can by executive power to give you back your Constitution. 

I've been campaigning on it daily for the last year and a half, been active
trying to legislate in this area.

Certainly, the war, but also a robust diplomacy in the Middle East as well. It
isn't just about ending the war; it's about engaging in a constructive and
positive way to offer some hope for people.

And I won't wait until January 20th on health care, energy policy. A week
after the election, I'll convene people to begin talking about the
stakeholders coming together to shape a policy that will give us answers on
those two issues.


 I'm motivated by my family because of their public service. About a week or two before my father passed away some 40 years ago, he was asked by a reporter, Carolyn, if he'd do it all over again in light of his lost election and what had happened to him. I'll never forget sitting in the room and hearing his answer that day. He said he'd do it again in a minute. 

He started the first National Youth Administration in my home state of
Connecticut in 1933 as part of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal.

He said there's no other calling in life where you can do as much for as many
people as you can through public service. Lawyers only have so many clients,
doctors only so many patients, but a well- intentioned public servant can make
a difference in the lives of millions of people.

That's my motivation. I want to carry that tradition on.


 That's why I'm running for president. 


 Well, again, the motivation of standing before you today and running for the presidency, I want to see our country regain its optimism and its confidence, a sense of hope about its future. I want to see us regain our moral authority around the world. 

I'm deeply saddened today that -- and some of you say the word "Abu Ghraib"
and "Guantanamo" -- we've moved from a generation where the word "Nuremberg"
used to mean something. And I want to see us come back again to that wonderful
sense about our future, that our best days are in front of us and not behind
us.

Obviously, you'd have spend as much time as you can with your family. And then
lastly, I have a New Year's wish that Iowans caucus, and you caucus correctly
on January 3rd.

(LAUGHTER)


 Well, aside from enjoying everything on a stick at the Iowa fair... 

(LAUGHTER)

... which is a great joy here, the thing I think I'll carry away the most is I
love the independence and the notion that Iowans, I think this time, but
historically as well, make up their own minds.


 I mean, they're being told all the time by people who spend -- here deciding what you're going to do on a caucus night, and you have proven over and over and over again you make up your own minds. And that's a good thing for America. 


