 I'm John Edwards. 


 Well, I think it's a difference between leading and following. I think Hillary's right -- all of us do want to end this war. But I have made very clear from the outset that the way to end the war is for the Congress to use its constitutional authority to fund. They should send the bill to the president with a timetable for withdrawal, which they did. The president vetoed it, then it came back, and then there was a moment of truth. 

And I said throughout the lead-up to the vote that I was against a funding
bill that did not have a timetable for withdrawal, that it was critical for
the Congress to stand firm; they were given a mandate by the American people.
And others on this stage -- Chris Dodd spoke out very loudly and clearly --


 \-- but I want to finish this -- others did not; others were quiet. They went quietly to the floor of the Senate, cast the right vote. But there is a difference between leadership and legislating. 


 No, I think it's obvious who I'm talking about. 


 Senator Clinton and Senator Obama did not say anything about how they were going to vote until they appeared on the floor of the Senate and voted. They were among the last people to vote. And I think that the importance of this is -- they cast the right vote, and I applaud them for that. But the importance of this is, they're asking to be president of the United States, and there is a difference between making clear, speaking to your followers, speaking to the American people about what you believe needs to be done. And I think all of us have a responsibility to lead on these issues -- 


 \-- not just on Iraq, but on health care, on energy, on all the other issues. 


 \-- and that's going to require any of us who want to be president to be open and honest with the American people. 


 Well, let me say first I think it's a very healthy thing that we have Democrats coming out with health care plans. This country's health care system is completely dysfunctional. I'm proud of the fact that I was the first person to come out with a specific, truly universal health care plan. 

Senator Obama came out with a plan just a few days ago, which I don't believe
is completely universal, but it deserves to be credited because he laid out
what the cost is and exactly how he was going to pay for it. And I do believe
that -- and, by the way, you didn't say this -- but my plan calls for 90
(billion dollars) to $120 billion a year. I'd pay for it by getting rid of
Bush's tax cuts for people who make $200,000 a year. And I believe you cannot
cover everybody in America, create a more efficient health care system, cover
the cracks -- you know, getting rid of things like pre-existing conditions and
making sure that mental health is treated the same as physical health -- I
don't think you can do all those things for nothing. That's not the truth. And
I think people have been so sick of listening to politicians who come and say,
we're going to give you universal health care, we're going to change the way
we use energy in America, we're going to strengthen the middle class, have
middle-class tax cuts, and in the process, we're going to eliminate the
federal deficit.


 That is not the truth. 


 And we need to be honest with people about that. 


 May I just say just 15 seconds worth. 


 Okay, I'll be very quick. 

I think it is very important, though, to understand -- I think Senator Obama
was very honest just now -- we have a threshold question about whether we're
going to have truly universal care. The New Republic has estimated that his
plan will leave about 15 million people uncovered. He says he will do
something about that later.

I believe unless we have a law requiring that every man, woman and child in
America be covered, we're going to have millions of people who aren't covered.


 Secondly -- secondly, all the savings that Senator Clinton just talked about are in my plan and they're in Senator Obama's plan. 


 And both of us have recognized that it's going to cost significant money, and we've talked about how we're going to pay for it. 


 But children -- children cannot make that decision. 


 The decision he's -- excuse me. 


 The decision he's talking about people making cannot be made by children, and that's why you have to require that they be covered. 


 Well, first of all, I think what the governor did and what New Hampshire has done is a great example for the rest of the country, not only civil unions, but all the partnership benefits, including Senator Clinton talked about getting rid of this "don't ask, don't tell" policy. 

I don't think the federal government has a role in telling either states or
religious institutions, churches, what marriages they can bless and can't
bless. I think the state of New Hampshire ought to be able to make that
decision for itself, like very other state in the country. I think every
church ought to be able to make that decision for itself. And I think it's
very important that we stand up against intolerance and against
discrimination.

But I want to add one thing on something that Governor Richardson said,
because it's been a tone of everything that's been discussed here today. The
place that I differ with Senator Biden, Senator Clinton, and I guess to some
extent Senator Obama -- and I agree with Governor Richardson -- it is the job
of the president of the United States not to legislate, but to lead.


 And voters need to ask themselves who's most likely to end the war in Iraq, who's most likely to lead on health care -- 


 \-- who's most likely to lead on immigration, which is what you just asked about. 


 Oh, the first thing we got to do is find out what's happening with these oil and gas companies, because we know they're making record amounts of money, we know that the same people that are refining the oil are selling it at the gas pump, so there's a huge vertical integration in this operation. I think there ought to be an investigation of the oil and gas companies by the Justice Department. I think if the laws that presently exist don't deal with this problem in price manipulation, there should be some change in the antitrust laws. I think we need states to enforce clean air laws against these refineries. And then I guess last but not last in the short term -- Chris is exactly right about the things we need to be doing in the long term, but in the short term, can America finally stop spending $3 billion a year of taxpayers' money subsidizing oil and gas companies that already make billions of dollars? That's what we ought to be doing. 


 I think this is the clear path. I think no president, no responsible president, would ever take any option off the table. 


 I just wanted to answer the original question that was asked, which was how do you reconcile Musharraf being in power with our ideas of a liberal democracy. And I think one of the things we have seen during the course of the Bush administration is America is not for any possible kind of democracy, we're for democracies that respect the rights of minorities, that actually respect civil rights and individual liberties. 

And one danger that anyone has to recognize, with the possible taking down as
Musharraf as the president of Pakistan -- and I met with him also in Islamabad
a few years ago -- one of the things we have to recognize is if he goes out of
power, given the power of radical Islam in Pakistan, there's absolutely no way
to know what kind of government will take his place.


 If you're talking about American troops -- 


 Yeah, I don't agree with that. 


 Well, I don't know if I know what a rich person is, but what I'd do for my health care plan is roll back the tax cuts for people who make over $200,000 a year, so $200,000 is a big value. 

But I want to go to a piece of this question that you asked, which is, you
talked about saving for your kids to be able to go to college, and we really
haven't talked about that tonight.

Just a quick idea: College for everyone. It's something we've actually --
Elizabeth and I put in place in eastern North Carolina, in a small community
in eastern North Carolina. And the idea is really simple. The idea is, if a
kid graduates from high school, qualified to be in college, and they commit to
work when they're there at least 10 hours a week, their tuition and books are
paid for. And the idea is, we want to make it simple for kids to go to
college. They have to work for it. We don't just give it to them.

And then, on top of that, so many young people are faced with this crushing
burden of debt when they graduate from college. I think it's something we
shouldn't just be doing. We've done this privately in this small area of
eastern North Carolina.


 But it's something we ought to be doing all across this country -- college for everyone. 


 To travel the world, reestablish America's -- reestablish -- I think my mike just came on -- reestablish America's moral authority in the world, which I think is absolutely crucial. The other things become less important and subservient. 

We have huge issues here at home. We've talked about some of them tonight:
energy; global warming; what we do about the issue of health care in America;
the poor, which we haven't talked about, unfortunately. But the single
greatest responsibility of the next president is to travel the world, speak to
the world about what real American values are -- equality, diversity. And to
lead an effort by America to reestablish our alliances around the world, which
is going to require time and focus. And then, third, to lead in taking action
that demonstrates that America is strong, but that America is also moral and
just, and we're going to help other people in the world and we're going to
demonstrate our commitment to humanity. All those things --


 \-- are crucial to reestablishing our moral authority to lead. 


 Well, let me say first, thank you to the Howard Bison for hosting us here tonight. We're very proud to be here. This is one of the great HBCUs in America, which all of us should be proud of. I'm proud of some that we have in my home state of North Carolina. 

And I also want to thank you for hosting this debate where finally we can talk
about inequality in America, which is at the heart and soul of why I'm running
for president of the United States. The truth is that slavery followed by
segregation followed by discrimination has had an impact that still is alive
and well in America, and it goes through every single part of American life.
We still have two public school systems in America. These two Americas that
I've talked about in the past -- man, they are out there thriving every single
day. We have two public school systems in America -- one for the wealthy, one
for everybody else.

We have two health care systems in America, and we know that race plays an
enormous role in the problems that African Americans face and the problems
that African Americans face with health care every single day. There are huge
health care disparities, which is why we need universal health care in this
country. But we have work to do. All of us have work to do. And by the way,
also making sure that every single American, including people of color, are
allowed to vote and that their vote is counted in the election -- (applause)
-- and that we know that their voice is heard in the election. But we have,
all of us -- all of us have a responsibility to build one America that works
for everybody, across all racial barriers that still exist in this country.
(Applause.)


 Let me say, first, DeWayne, this issue of poverty in America is the cause of my life. It's the reason I started a poverty center at the University of North Carolina. It's the reason I've been working so hard on this issue. 

And I think the starting place is to understand that there is no one single
cause of poverty. You know, when you have young African- American men who are
completely convinced that they're either going to die or go to prison, and see
absolutely no hope in their lives; when they live in an environment where the
people around them don't earn a decent wage; when they go to schools that are
second-class schools compared to the schools in wealthy suburban areas, they
don't see anything getting better, there are lots of things that we need to
do.

I actually agree with what Senator Biden said about early childhood, but I
think we should start much earlier than 4 years of age, which is what the
focus has been.

I think it's also true that we need to pay teachers better. I think we ought
to actually provide incentive pay to get our best teachers in the inner-city
schools and into poor rural areas where they're needed the most. But it goes
beyond that. We also have to make work pay for young men who are graduating
from high school, the very group that you're describing, which means we're
going to have to do a whole group of things. We need to significantly raise
the minimum wage. We need to strengthen the right to organize. And we need to
help low-income families save --


 \-- so they're not prey to predatory lenders that are taking advantage of them today. (Applause.) 


 Thank you very much for the question. 

African-American women are 25 times as likely to be infected with AIDS today
in America than white women. Over half of the new diagnoses of AIDS in America
are African-Americans. So this is obviously having a disproportionate effect
on people of color and on the African-American community.

I was in a medical center in Los Angeles just a few days ago, where they're
providing treatment and help to those who -- first to determine whether they
have AIDS; second, to provide them the treatment and the drugs that they need.

But we shouldn't be dependent on private funding to do what needs to be done
about a scourge that exists in America, and particularly exists among African-
Americans in America. Here are the three things I think we need to do.

First, we need to fully fund finding a cure for AIDS, so we can end this
scourge once and for all. (Applause.)

Second, we need to fully fund the legislation, the law known as Ryan White, to
make sure that the treatment is available for anybody who's diagnosed with
AIDS. (Applause.)

And then finally we need to ensure that Medicaid covers AIDS drugs and AIDS
treatment -- (applause) -- to make sure that people get the treatment they
need, particularly low-income families who get the -- who are diagnosed with
AIDS -- low-income individuals.


 We have 30 seconds on this -- 


 Okay. 


 Well, I think we have -- in fact, I've heard Warren Buffett himself talk about the genetic lottery that we have in America, where, you know, the family you're born into has an awful lot to do with what happens with your life. 

And what we want to do, I think, is live in an America where, no matter who
your family is or what the color of your skin or where you're born, everybody
gets the same chance to do well. And people who have done well ought to have
more responsibility to pay back to the country and to the community and those
around them.

I think there are at least a couple things we need to do. First, we need to
get rid of George Bush's tax cuts for rich people -- (applause) -- which have
distorted the tax system in America. I would use that money to pay for
universal health care, to make sure everyone's covered.

But the second problem that he's talking about is, we have a capital gains
rate, 15 percent, which is the rate that most pay on their investment income,
like Warren Buffett, that's significantly lower than the tax rate that his
secretary pays.


 That's not right. There is a moral disconnect. We ought to honor work in this country, not just wealth. 


 Tavis, I -- everything that's been said is correct, you know -- changing mandatory minimum, changing the disparity between crack and powder cocaine, having a system that's fair. If you're African-American, you're more likely to be charged with a crime. If you're charged with a crime, you're more likely to be convicted of the crime. If you're convicted of the crime, you're more likely to get a severe sentence. There is no question that our justice system is not color-blind. 

But can we also create an infrastructure for success for those who are charged
and convicted for the first time, so that we help them with drug counseling,
job counseling, job training, education -- (applause) -- help them get the
back -- back into the community with some chance of changing their lives.


 This is an issue I care about personally and deeply. As many of you know, I announced my presidential campaign 

from the Ninth Ward of New Orleans. I think we took 700 college kids down to
help rebuild who gave up their spring break to work with me and others to help
rebuild New Orleans. I'm proud of those kids. (Applause.)

We have a huge responsibility. As president, I would make one person -- a very
high-level, competent person in the White House -- responsible for reporting
to me every day on what he did in New Orleans yesterday -- (applause) -- and
then I'll say the next day: What did you do yesterday? And what we should do
is allow the people of New Orleans to rebuild their own city. We ought to pay
them a decent wage, give them health care coverage, instead of having big
multinational --


 \-- corporation(s) get billion-dollar contracts with the government. 


 Let me say first, this is something I don't have to read about in a book. I've seen it up close. I saw what happen when the mill that my dad worked in all his life, and I worked in myself when I was young, closed and the jobs went somewhere else. It was not just devastating to him and his pride and his dignity. It was devastating to the community, and the same thing has happened all over America. 

I think a lot the things that have been said are true. America's got to
compete.

We have to be the best-educated, most innovative workforce on the planet.

We also need trade agreements with real environmental and labor standards that
the president of the United States is willing to enforce.

And third, we need to eliminate all tax breaks for companies who are taking
their jobs overseas and getting a tax break for doing it. (Applause.)


 I agree, a no-fly zone -- we need to get a security force on the ground; sanctions -- we need to put pressure on the Chinese. But I -- Darfur is part of a bigger question for America, which is, how do we re-establish ourselves after Iraq as a force for good in the world again? And I think there are lots of things we ought to do. 

Instead of spending $500 billion in Iraq, suppose America led an effort to
make primary school education available to 100 million children in the world
who have no education, including in Africa.


 Suppose we led on stopping the spread of disease, sanitation, clean drinking water and economic development. 


 Let me say first, thank you to the AFL-CIO for hosting this forum. Thank you to all the men and women of organized labor for what you do every single day for working people in this country. We're all very proud to be here, and proud to have been with you before tonight in the effort to help working people in this country. 

I actually don't think it's very hard to convince the American people. Given
what's happened in Minneapolis, given what's just happened in the mine in
Utah, the American people understand how serious this is. They want something
done about the infrastructure. But I think the fundamental question is, who's
going to bring about the change that has not occurred over the last three or
four decades in Washington, D.C.?

Here's my belief. My belief is we don't want to change one group of insiders
for a different group of insiders. We need to give the power in America back
to you and back to working men and women all across this country. And I do not
believe we will see the kind of change that we need unless WE begin to lead
that change.

On Saturday, this past Saturday, I think a very stark contrast was presented
to Democratic voters in this primary. What do you want to see done? I asked at
that debate on Saturday here in Chicago whether all the Democratic candidates
and whether the Democratic party would say no from this day forward to
Washington insider lobbyist money. We should say, this game is over; the
system is rigged in Washington, DC. It is not working for you; it is not
working for the American people. And we're going to stand up to give the power
in America back to you and back to all Americans who deserve it by saying no
forever to lobbyist money in Washington, DC. (Applause.)


 It needs to be fixed, but the first thing I want to say is NAFTA is a perfect example of the bigger problem. This deal was negotiated by Washington insiders, not by anybody in this stadium tonight. And the question is, when are we going to change it? It's cost us a million jobs. We need environmental and labor standards. We need actually the Justice Department prosecuting the standards under NAFTA. 

But the last thing I want to say -- and I want everyone here to hear my voice
on this -- the one thing you can count on is you will never see a picture of
me on the front of Fortune Magazine saying, "I am the candidate that big
corporate America is betting on." That will never happen. That's one thing you
can take to the bank.


 China is a competitor. But besides all the things that have been said, and these statements are all correct about them holding American debt, about or trade deficit. No one's mentioned human rights abuses, but there are huge human rights abuses going on in China. 

But the other thing I want to mention is, there's also a trade safety issue
here. What about 2 million toys that have come into the United States and had
to be recalled from China? How about the fact that we don't have real country-
of-origin labeling that the United States of America actually enforces, so the
American people know what they're buying, where it's coming from?

We should have a president of the United States who enforces country-of-origin
labeling. We should have a Consumer Product Safety Commission that's not
looking out for big multinational corporations, that's actually looking out
for the safety of our children here in America.


 Well, we have to prepare for that possibility. I can tell you exactly what I would do as president. As president, I'd draw 40 (thousand) to 50,000 troops out today. I would engage the Iraqi government and the Sunni leadership, the Sunni and Shi'a leadership, into trying to reach some kind of political reconciliation. Because without that, there cannot be security in Iraq. And then we need to make a serious, intense diplomatic effort to bring the Iranians and the Syrians and the others in the region into helping provide stability in Iraq. 

And we have to prepare for the possibility, which George Bush has never done,
that things may actually go bad. That means we've got to be prepared to
control a civil war if it starts to spill outside the borders of Iraq. And we
have to be prepared for the worst possibility that you never hear anyone
talking about, which is the possibility that genocide breaks out and the Shi'a
try to systematically eliminate the Sunni. As president of the United States,
I would plan and prepare for all those possibilities.


 Let me finish this. (Cheers, applause.) It's great to give a talk. It is great to give a talk, but who was with you in crunch time? Because if we were with you in crunch time, we will be with you when crunch time comes for you in all of organized labor. (Cheers, applause.) That's the question you need to ask yourself. 


 Who will stand with you when it really matters? 


 I am. And I have been a leader on the issues of organized labor and the issues of labor unions for years and years and years. Even though I'm from a state that has a very -- just like Joe -- and he deserves credit for that -- I'm from a state that has a very small organized labor contingent, but I want to say something about this. The reason that it's so important to have a president of the United States who understands the importance of organized labor, not just the politics, not just for political support, but understands and is willing to speak to America about the critical importance of organized labor in the long-term economic security of all Americans, not just those who are in labor unions now -- labor unions have built the middle class in this country. 


 The American people need to hear and understand that. 


 Because -- it's very different, because what's happened is the lobbyists in Washington, D.C., are the people whose job it is to rig this system against all of you. They do it every single day. They get paid to do it. 

And the difference, by the way, between them and lawyers is lawyers go into
courtrooms doing exactly the same thing, speaking to a jury, but when lawyers
give money to the jury who are making the decisions, that's called a bribe.
When lobbyists go to members of Congress and give money to them, that's called
politics. The question is, are we actually going to bring an end to this? Are
we going to stop it? You're being outspent 18 to 1 by big multinational
corporate lobbyists in Washington, D.C.

What I believe is that America needs change, and I think the Democratic Party
-- we don't need lobbyists in Washington, D.C.


 We need the Democratic Party to stand up for working men and women, and we need a president of the United States who will stand up for working men and women. (Applause.) 


 It's definitely too long. And one of the things we could do is publicly finance our political campaigns, which we should do. (Applause.) 

But we need change in this country in the worst kind of way. I asked James
Lowe, who's 51 years old, who I referred to in a previous debate, who's from
Virginia, to be here tonight. He was born with a severe cleft palate and lived
50 years of his life in America without being able to speak because he
couldn't get the health care that he needed.

Now, I don't know about you. He was very noble and kind about it. I think it
is outrageous that in the United States of America somebody could live for
five decades not able to talk because they can't get the health care they
need.

When are we going to actually stand up to these drug companies, these
insurance companies? We've got to stop playing nice. We have to beat these
people. There is too much at stake for America and too much at stake for
people like James Lowe.




 I reject this bumper sticker, Wolf. And that's exactly what it is, it's a bumper sticker. As president of the United States, I will do absolutely everything to find terrorists where they are, to stop them before they can do harm to us, before they can do harm to America or to its allies. Every tool available -- military, alliances, intelligence -- I will use. But what this global war on terror bumper sticker -- political slogan, that's all it is, it's all it's ever been -- was intended to do was for George Bush to use it to justify everything he does. The ongoing war in Iraq, Guantanamo, Abu Ghraib, spying on Americans, torture, none of those things are okay. They are not the United States of America. 


 There are differences between us. And I think Democratic voters deserve to know the differences between us. I think there is a difference between making very clear, when the crucial moment comes on Congress ending this war, what your position is, and standing quiet. That's all I'm saying. 


 They eventually voted the right way. I respect them for voting the right way. But there are important differences between us on this, and the voters are entitled to know that. 


 No, actually I think that -- I would agree with some of what Hillary just said. I think it's true that -- I was on the Intelligence Committee, I don't think Senator Clinton was, but I was on the Intelligence Committee. I received direct information from that. I met with former high-level people in the Clinton administration who gave me additional information and I read the summary of the NIE. I think I had the information I needed. I don't think that was the question. 

I think one difference we do have is I think I was wrong. I should never have
voted for this war. And this goes to the issue Senator Obama raised a few
minutes ago. He deserves credit for being against this war from the beginning.

He was right. I was wrong. (Applause.) And I think it is important for anybody
who seeks to be the next president of the United States, given the dishonesty
that we've been faced with over the last several years, to be honest to the
country. We have to reestablish trust between the American people and the
president --


 Well, let me -- can I be more specific. I think that beyond just talking about diplomacy, if you lived in Iran, you know that the Iranian people actually rallied for America on the streets of Tehran after September the 11th. And there's a long history of pro-American sentiment in Iran. 

There is an extraordinary opportunity available to us on Iran, and there's a
very clear path, from my perspective. They have a president who is politically
unpopular. The people are in a different place. He hasn't done what he
promised to do, Ahmadinejad, when he was elected president.

We don't have economic leverage over the Iranians, but the Europeans do, the
European banking system does. We should put two options on the table. One,
carrots; we'll make the nuclear fuel available to you, the international
community, but we'll control it, you can't nuclearize -- you can't weaponize
it. Second, we're going to put a clear set of economic incentives on the
table.

And the Iranian people need to hear this.


 It needs to be not behind closed doors. Just 10 more seconds. And then the alternative, the stick, is if they don't do that, there are going to be serious economic sanctions. 

We need to drive a wedge between the Iranian people and this radical leader.


 Actually, I'd disagree with my friend Chris Dodd about that. I think that we should use whatever tools available to us. 

But -- and I have to say Senator Biden, Governor Richardson, I applaud their
being so vocal and out there on this issue. It's enormously important.

But I think all of us recognize that this is a piece of a bigger puzzle, which
is America no longer has the moral authority to lead in the world. Watching a
genocide continue has contributed to that, but it is not the only thing. The
spread of HIV/AIDS. I think America ought to actually lead an effort to make
primary school education available to 100 million children in the world who
desperately need it, and including in Africa.

And you asked earlier about --


 Bless you, first of all, for what you've been through. You're a perfect example of exactly what's wrong with America both on pension protection and on health care. And we've, unfortunately, not been able to do the things that need to be done in this country. 

I have a very simple view about this. My view is that we ought to treat the
pensions and the retirement of the chairmen and CEOs of companies exactly the
way we treat every other worker in the company -- (off mike) -- (cheers,
applause) -- and we ought to have -- (interrupted by cheers, applause) -- and
we ought to have universal health care in this country -- (cheers) -- we need
it in the worst kind of way so that when you're bargaining, you're not
bargaining about health care costs.

But I want to say one other thing. I intend to be the president of the United
States who walks onto the White House lawn and explains to America how
important unions and organized labor is to the future and the economic
security of this country. It is fine to come up on this stage and give a nice
talk. The question is, who's been with you in the crunch? In the last few
years, 200 times I have walked picket lines. I have helped organize thousands
of workers with 23 national unions. I have worked with employers.

Here's what you need to ask yourself. It's great to give a talk --


 Yeah, I mean, every president of a union who's here today and their membership knows exactly where I've been. Two hundred times I've walked on picket lines. I was on a picket line on Saturday. I was on a picket line on Sunday. (Cheers.) I have been in organizing campaigns all over this country. 

Here's the America that I believe in. I believe in an America where anyone who
works hard is able to earn a decent wage. I believe in an America where
somebody who works hard doesn't have to worry about whether their child has
health care. I believe in an America where anybody whose been with a company
for 20 years has a pension and it can't be taken away. And finally, I believe
in an America where if you have to go out on strike, no scab can walk through
that picket line and take your job -- (cheers, applause) -- away from you.


 That's what kind of America I believe in, and that's what the kind of America I will lead as president of the United States. (Continued cheers, applause.) 


 Well, first, good evening. (Chuckles.) It's wonderful to be here. Let me talk a little bit about what I see as the choice that voters have. I think that from my perspective, President Bush over the last seven years has destroyed the trust relationship between America and its president. In fact, I think he's destroyed the trust relationship between the president of the United States and the rest of the world. And I think it is crucial for Democratic voters and caucus-goers to determine who they can trust, who's honest, who's sincere, who has integrity. 

And I think it's fair, in that regard, to look at what people have said.
Senator Clinton says that she believes she can be the candidate for change,
but she defends a broken system that's corrupt in Washington, D.C. She says
she will end the war, but she continues to say she'll keep combat troops in
Iraq and continue combat missions in Iraq. To me, that's not ending the war;
that's the continuation of the war.

She says she'll stand up to George Bush on Iran. She just said it again. And
in fact, she voted to give George Bush the first step in moving militarily on
Iran, and he's taken it. Bush and Cheney have taken it. They've now declared
the Iranian Revolutionary Guard a terrorist organization and a proliferator of
weapons of mass destruction. I think we have to stand up to this president.

And then finally she said in our last debate that she was against any changes
on Social Security -- benefits, retirement age or raising the cap on the
Social Security tax. But apparently it's been reported that she said privately
something different than that. And I think the American people, given this
historic moment in our country's history, deserve a president of the United
States that they know will tell them the truth, and won't say one thing one
time and something different at a different time.


 I do. 


 Thank you very much. 

Well, I just listened to what Senator Clinton said, and she said she wanted to
maximize pressure on the Bush administration. So the way to do that is to vote
yes on a resolution that looks like it was written literally by the neocons? I
mean, has anyone read this thing? I mean, it literally gave Bush and Cheney
exactly what they wanted.

It didn't just give them what they wanted; they acted on it. A few weeks
later, they declared the Iranian Revolutionary Guard a terrorist organization
and -- this is going to sound very familiar; remember from Iraq, the prelude
to Iraq? -- proliferators of weapons of mass destruction. The way you put
pressure on this administration is you stand up to -- you say no.

A lot of us on this stage have learned our lessons the hard way, that you give
this president an inch and he will take a mile. And this is about such an
important issue, and we have to stand up to this president. We need to make it
absolutely clear that we have no intention of letting Bush, Cheney or this
administration invade Iraq (sic) because they have been rattling the saber
over and over and over.

And what this resolution did, written literally in the language of the
neocons, is it enables this president to do exactly what he wants to do. He
continues to march forward. He continues to say this is a terrorist
organization. He continues to say these are proliferators of weapons of mass
destruction. How in the world is that Democrats? We're not talking about
Republicans now, Chris and Joe -- Democrats standing up to this president and
saying no, we are not going to allow this; we are not going to allow this
march to war in Iran.


 What I will do is take all the responsible steps that can be taken to keep Iran from developing a nuclear weapon. 


 Well, I -- here's what I want. I want to make certain that voters in Iowa, New Hampshire and all across America -- Democrats, independents -- understand that you have choices in this election, very clear choices. If you believe that combat missions should be continued in Iraq over the long term, if you believe that combat troops should remain stationed in Iraq, and if you believe there should be no actual timetable for withdrawal, then Senator Clinton's your candidate. 

I don't. I think that we need to end combat missions; we need to get combat
troops out of Iraq. As president of the United States, I will do that. I think
it's a requirement of leadership as president, and I will do it in my first
year in office. Combat missions ended, combat troops out of Iraq, period. So
there's a very clear choice here between the candidates.

And the second thing that I want to be certain that voters are aware of, when
we talk -- we've had long discussion about Iran, and Barack just made the
connection to Iran, and there is a very clear connection, because we need to
learn from the past. And what we've learned from the past is you cannot trust
this president, and what I worry about is if Bush invades Iran six months from
now, I mean, are we going to hear, "If I only I had known then what I know
now"? Well, we know enough now to know we have to stand up to this president.

And the second point I would make is, I was surprised by Senator Clinton's
vote, I'll be honest about that, and then I saw an explanation of it in The
New York Times for her vote, which basically said she was moving from primary
mode to general election mode. I think that our responsibility as presidential
candidates is to be in tell-the-truth mode all the time. We should not be
saying something different in the primary than we say in the general election.

I think that's what Americans have been hearing from George Bush, and I think
they're looking for something different, and voters have a choice in this
election.


 Thank you very much. 

I mean, another perspective on why the Republicans keep talking about Senator
Clinton is, Senator, she -- they may actually want to run against you, and
that's the reason they keep bringing you up.

What I would say is Senator Clinton just said that she believes we desperately
need change in this country, and I -- I agree with that. I actually think we
have a system that's broken. It's rigged, it's corrupt, and it does not work
for the American people, and it's time we start telling the truth about that.
Too much influence from entrenched interests -- insurance companies, drug
companies, oil companies. Too much influence from Washington lobbyists.

And so the question I think that voters have to ask themselves is, do you
believe that the candidate who's raised the most money from Washington
lobbyists, Democrat or Republican; the candidate who's raised the most money
from the health industry -- drug companies, health insurance companies; the
candidate who's raised the most money from the defense industry, Republican or
Democrat; who -- and the answer to all those questions is that's Senator
Clinton -- will she be the person who brings about the change in this country?
You know, I -- I believe in Santa Claus, I believe in the Tooth Fairy, but I
don't think that's going to happen. I really don't.

And I -- I think that if people want the status quo, Senator Clinton's your
candidate. That's what I believe. If they want real change, then they need
somebody who tells the truth about a system that doesn't work, who believes
that this may actually be the first generation -- we're all worried about this
being the first generation that doesn't leave the world and America better for
our children, unlike 20 generations that came before us.

This is not an abstract thing. This is not about lobbyists. Matter of fact,
it's not about any of us. The truth is, when this election is over, I'm going
to be fine. Senator Clinton's going to be fine. Senator Obama's going to be
fine. The question is, will America be fine? And will we ensure -- and I think
this is the great moral test of our generation -- will we ensure that our
children have a better life than we've had? That's the responsibility we have.


 I do. 

First of all, let me be absolutely clear about this. I think I said it a few
minutes ago. Nobody on this stage is pure, and that absolutely includes me.
And I am not perfect, nor do I claim to be. It is true that I, like Senator
Obama, have taken no money from Washington lobbyists in this campaign and no
money from special interest PACs, but I'm not interested in patting myself on
the back or actually talking about anybody personally on this stage.

And I completely disagree with what Bill said. This is not about the past.
This is about the future. This is about whether we believe this system works.
I mean, we are here in Philadelphia where the Founding Fathers decided that
the power, the sovereign power in this government should not reside with the
rich and the powerful; it ought to reside with the people. And everybody in
America can see what's happening now. We don't have universal health care
because of drug companies, insurance companies and their lobbyists.

Well, the reason we haven't tackled global warming is because of oil
companies, power companies and their lobbyists.

And the question is, what are we going to do for our children? I mean, are --
I'll say this to every voter who's watching this debate: Are you -- listen,
we've all stood by and watched this happen. That includes me. I'm guilty,
guilty as charged.

But the question is, are you willing to look your children in the eye tonight
and say, "I'm going to turn this mess over to you"? Because if you turn your
back on the incompetence and the corruption that exists in Washington today,
that's exactly what you're saying. You're saying, "I'm going to let my
children and my grandchildren take care of that." I'm not willing to do that.


 Well, what we can do in the short term and I will do as president is ensure that my Justice Department investigates what these oil companies who are vertically integrated, you know, from refinery to pump, are doing. 

But I think there's something else. And we've talked a lot about being
straight with people tonight. I think it's really important -- every four
years, the presidential candidates roll through Iowa and New Hampshire,
promise this, promise that, promise this. Here's the truth. We need to ask
Americans to be patriotic about something other than war. And I want to be the
president who says to America: We're in this together.

We're going to have to be willing to sacrifice. If we love this country
enough, we're going to have to conserve in our homes and our work places and
through our behavior to make America what it's capable of being.


 Well, I think that when families are devastated -- and we've lived with this in North Carolina because we've been regularly hit by hurricanes, and I've spent an awful lot of time in New Orleans. When families are hit by natural disasters, I think it is for the national community to be there for them. I think that's our joint responsibility as a national community to be there for them. 

And my view about what's happened, particularly in New Orleans, is it's
absolutely heartbreaking to see what's happened there because this is a
perfect example of a government that's a mess and the American people who are
absolutely extraordinary. I mean, you look at how America has responded to
this strategy. They have been volunteering, contributing; I took 700 college
kids down to New Orleans who gave up their spring break to go down there and
work to help rehabilitate houses. I was so inspired and proud of those young
kids.

But the government has been a complete disaster, and contracts have been let
to these multinational corporations instead of allowing the people of New
Orleans to rebuild their own city. My view is we didn't need a surge in
Baghdad, we need a surge in New Orleans. We need to be there for our people
who are struggling.

And I do think we can be smart about planning. I think actually in the case of
New Orleans there was an extraordinary opportunity to rebuild a city that was
more economically integrated, more racially integrated. Those pictures that we
saw coming out of the Ninth Ward of New Orleans I think broke a lot of
people's hearts, and I think actually was a wake-up call to a lot of Americans
who didn't realize that kind of problem existed in New Orleans.


 Of course, we have to be smart. We have to be environmentally sensitive. There's actually -- on the coast of North Carolina we've done a great deal to do that, to preserve wetlands for example, which are a crucial barrier to help protect our coasts. But yes, smart, but when a -- when a natural disaster comes, our country needs to be there for our people. 


 Yes. 


 They should. I mean, this is an example of the extraordinary corruption that still exists in the system and the government. 

What happened was the Congress started to move to act, the lobbyists for the
hedge funds descended and managed to kill it. It's just that simple. This is
one, unfortunately, of a whole series of things that indicate that our
government doesn't work the way it should and that corruption has crept into
it. I wish it was the only thing. It's not the only thing.

I mean, we have young men and women serving this country patriotically and
heroically in Iraq, and we got a bunch of paid mercenaries moving around over
there working for Blackwater and others who gave hundreds of thousands of
dollars to Bush and the Republican Party. We've got politically connected
people at home making millions of dollars while our men and women serve and
put their lives on the line in Iraq.

We decided to try to keep the country safer by inspecting containers that come
into this country, and who lobbied against it? The biggest company in America
-- Wal-Mart. We've had trade deals that have cost us millions of jobs, and
what did America get in return? We got millions of dangerous Chinese toys.
These things are all evidence of a system that doesn't work.

Now we can turn our backs on it and pretend it's not true and, as I said
earlier, leave this mess to our children and our grandchildren.

Or we can do what the founding fathers said we should do, and what has
happened over and over in American history when this happened.

There is nothing the American people can't do. There's nothing wrong with the
American people. They are strong, heroic, passionate, but their voice needs to
be heard. The government belongs to them. It doesn't belong to this crowd of
powerful, monied interest in Washington, D.C. And we have to be willing to say
the truth about it and to change this system, so that our children actually
can have a better life than we've had.


 I think it's -- I think we still have two public school system in many way in -- ways in America. We have one for affluent communities and one for everybody else. 

I think the things that we need to do specifically: We should have universal
pre-K for all four-year-olds. We ought to deal with nutritional and health
care needs for younger children, younger than four years of age, starting at
about age two. We should have a national teaching university so that we
attract our most talented young people, send them out across America to teach
in the toughest places to teach. We should give incentive pay to teachers who
are willing to teach in the most difficult places. We should have second-
chance schools for kids who are dropping out and college for any kid who's
willing to work when they're in college.


 What we need is a universal health care system that gets doctors out of the business of having to deal with insurance companies on a daily basis, to protect them from that. 

But I want to talk about another piece of this, which is we have a nursing
crisis in America, a serious nursing crisis. So what we need to do is expand
our nursing schools, give scholarships to young people who are willing, when
they go to nursing school, to commit to come out and go to the places that are
underserved. We need to get rid of things like mandatory overtime. We need to
have safer staff- to-patient ratios so that we can deal with this crisis for
the men and women who actually provide a huge amount of the health care in
this country.


 For children and try to protect children and using technology to protect children? I would. 

I want to add something that Chris Dodd just said a minute ago, because I
don't want it to go unnoticed. Unless I missed something, Senator Clinton said
two different things in the course of about two minutes just a few minutes
ago, and I think this is a real issue for the country.

I mean, America is looking for a president who will say the same thing, who
will be consistent, who will be straight with them. Because what we've had for
seven years is double-talk from Bush and from Cheney, and I think America
deserves us to be straight.


 Because I think it sends the wrong signal to young people. And I think the president of the United States has a responsibility to ensure that we're sending the right signals to young people. 


 Well, can I say first, nobody on this stage is perfect, and that certainly includes me. (Cross talk.) And I don't claim perfection, far from it. 

What I would say is that the issue is whether we can have a president that can
restore trust for the American people in the president of the United States.
(Applause.) Because I think this president has destroyed that trust, and I
think there are fair questions to be asked of all of us, including Senator
Clinton.

Senator Clinton says she will end the war. She also says she will continue to
keep combat troops in Iraq and continue combat missions in Iraq. She says she
will turn up the heat on George Bush and the Republicans. But when the crucial
vote came on stopping Bush, Cheney and the neocons on Iran, she voted with
Bush and Cheney. (Applause.)

On the issue of Social Security, she said, standing beside me on the stage,
that she would not do anything about the cap on Social Security taxes. And she
has said privately to people, because it's been reported in the press, that,
in fact, she would consider raising that cap. And the most important issue is,
she says she will bring change to Washington while she continues to defend a
system that does not work, that is broken, that is rigged and is corrupt,
corrupted against the interest of most Americans and corrupted -- (cheers,
applause).


 Let me -- and corrupted for a very small, very powerful, very well-financed -- 


 So we have fundamental differences. 


 It's absolutely fair. But -- (applause) -- it's absolutely fair for people to learn from their experience and grow and mature and change. Anybody who's not willing to change based on what they learn is ignorant, and everybody ought to be willing to do that. 

That's not what I'm saying. I'm saying there's a difference between that and
saying exact -- saying two contrary things at exactly the same time. I mean,
for example, just over the course of the last week, Senator Clinton said in
Washington that she would vote for the Peru trade deal -- (boos) -- and she
said in Iowa, talking to union members, that she wanted a moratorium on trade
deals.

The important thing about this, though, is none of us -- none of us -- because
the reality is -- and I want to add onto something that Joe Biden said. You
know, before I came over here tonight, I was thinking, we're going to have
this debate; when we finish, all of you are going to be on television saying,
oh, who scored points, who won the debate. All of us are going to be fine. The
question is, will America be fine?

Because what I saw -- (cheers, applause) -- before we came over here on your
troll underneath the screen, 35 million Americans last year went hungry.
Thirty-seven million people in this country live in poverty every day. Forty-
seven million Americans have no health care coverage. And there is a
fundamental choice that everyone in this room and Democratic voters have to
make, and that is, who do you believe will take on this system and change it
so that it is no longer rigged, corrupt and --


 \-- rigged against the interests -- 


 \-- of the American people. That is the fundamental choice. And I think people are entitled to know that they have choices. There's nothing personal about this. This is about what America needs to be. This is about those 35 million people -- 


 \-- who are hungry every single year. When is our party -- 


 \-- going to show a little backbone and strength -- 


 \-- and courage and speak up -- 


 \-- for those people who have been left behind? (Cheers, applause.) 


 Is that a planted question? 


 Yes, I absolutely will support the Democratic nominee for president. 


 Tell me again what your question is. (Laughter.) 


 If we don't have -- 


 No, but I don't accept the proposition that we're not going to have comprehensive immigration reform. What I do support -- (scattered applause) -- and what I will do as president of the United States is move this country toward comprehensive immigration reform -- 


 \-- and anyone who's on the path to earning American citizenship should be able to have a drivers license. (Scattered cheers, applause.) 


 Well, I think first of all, we have some basic goals that we need to be focused on with respect to Pakistan. One is to make sure that the extremists in northwest Pakistan are under control. Second, that we provide support for the democratic reformers. Third is that -- Senator Biden just spoke about, to make sure these elections take place in January. And fourth, we need to make certain that the nuclear weapons are under control. 

Now, this leads to a bigger question. I think Pakistan is the living,
breathing example that America's ad hoc policy of dealing with the spread of
nuclear weapons, while it's absolutely required in today's world given what's
happening with Iran, given what we see today in Pakistan and the incredible
fragility of the administration in Pakistan and the presence of extraordinary
extremist elements within Pakistan, that this is the living, breathing example
--


 \-- of a policy that will not work over the long term. 

I'm about to finish. What we have to do, what America needs to do and what I
will do as president of the United States is to lead a long-term international
effort to rid the world of nuclear weapons.

It is the only way we're going to keep the world secure and keep America
secure. (Applause.)


 Well -- (chuckles) -- I'm not sure what being a trial lawyer has to do with it, but -- what my response is -- 


 \-- America -- America's trade -- (laughs) -- cute. Cute, Dennis. (Applause.) 

I think America's -- America's trade policy has been a complete disaster. I do
believe that. NAFTA, CAFTA, Colombia, Korea, Peru -- which we're now
considering -- has been a complete and total disaster.

And I think it's really important to pull what's been happening with trade
into the bigger picture of what's happening with America because what I
believe is that powerful interests -- particularly big corporate interests --
have literally taken over this government, and they've taken over it against
the interests of ordinary Americans. (Applause.) And a living, breathing
example of that is, in 1993, when we were in control of the White House, of
the United States Senate and the United States House, we made an effort to
pass universal health care.

The big drug companies, insurance companies and their lobbyists killed it. At
the same time, NAFTA was put on the table.


 The big corporations in America were for NAFTA. 

So what did we get with a Democratic Congress, with a Democratic president? We
didn't -- no, let me finish this. We didn't get something that America
desperately needed, which is universal health care, but we got something
America did not need, which is NAFTA, which has cost us millions of jobs.
(Applause.) We will not change this country if we replace a crowd of corporate
Republicans with corporate Democrats. (Cheers, applause.) We have to give the
power in this democracy back to the American people. That's what's at stake in
this election.


 I think what's the mistake is allowing China to operate unfettered, to send dangerous products into this country, to not have the president of the United States hold them responsible for their trading obligations or the WTO, which has not been done. 


 I think it was right to bring them into WTO. It's wrong to not hold them responsible for their obligations. 


 I think -- are you looking at me? (Laughs.) 


 I think that every single candidate on this stage should be held to exactly the same standard. 

I do believe, however, that the voters need to know that we have choices.
There's nothing personal about this. I think there are very good people
running in the Democratic Party for president, and we need to have a strong
candidate in this presidential race.

But I think there are differences between us, and voters are entitled to know
what those differences are without it being personal, without it being attack-
oriented.

I spoke earlier about the difference between corporate Democrats and corporate
Republicans and how critical it is for us to give the power in the democracy
back to the American people so we can give a better life to our children, as
20 generations before us have done.

And my point is, some of us have taken a different approach to that. Senator
Clinton defends the system, takes money from lobbyists, does all those things.
And my point is simply that people have -- (chorus of boos) -- no, wait a
minute. Voters have those choices. Voters have those choices. They deserve to
know that they have those choices and that there are, in fact, differences
between us. But I think every one of us should be held to the same standard.


 I say he's right, he's right, and this administration has done more than abuse the Patriot Act. And the Patriot Act needs to be dramatically changed, by the way. (Cheers, applause.) 

But in addition to that, the racial profiling that you're describing has to be
stopped, and it will be stopped when I'm president of the United States. And
we're going to take the steps that need to be taken to restore America's moral
leadership in the world, and that means a whole group of things: stopping the
profiling, stopping the illegal -- and I use that term intentionally -- the
illegal spying on the American people that this president has been engaged in
-- (cheers, applause) -- closing Guantanamo, which I think is a national
embarrassment -- (cheers, applause) -- no more secret prisons, no more
rendition.

And it's just absolutely amazing to me that there's actually an open
discussion in the United States of America about what kind of torture will be
tolerated. I'll tell you what kind of torture will be tolerated when I'm
president of the United States, no torture will be tolerated when I'm
president of the United States. (Cheers, applause.)


 We're going to restore our respect in the world. 


 I would insist that they recognize the right to privacy and recognize Roe v. Wade as settled law. But I want to go beyond what some others have said here because it is so crucial if you grew up like I did in the segregated style and you saw how important it was to have federal judges who had some backbone and were willing to stand up against popular opinion -- but we had a judge who desegregated the public schools in North Carolina, in Charlotte, North Carolina. 

He literally had to have armed guards take him from home to work and home each
day. That's the kind of courage and strength we need in a United States
Supreme Court justice.


 If I as president of the United States know where Osama bin Laden is, I would go get him, period. 

This man is the mastermind of a mass murder in the United States of America.
He is public enemy number one, as Al Qaida is.

But I would add, this has to be put into a bigger context of what should
America be doing over the long term to deal with this whole issue of nuclear
proliferation? Because if you look at Pakistan, it's a perfect vehicle for
actually thinking about this issue.

Here's an unstable leader, Musharraf, in a country with a serious radical --
violently radical element that could, under some circumstances, take over the
government.

If they did, they would have control of a nuclear weapon. They could either
use it, or they could turn it over to a terrorist organization to be used
against America or some of our allies.

I think the bigger picture on this is, what do we do over the long term?

Because what we're doing now is essentially an ad hoc, nation-by- nation,
case-by-case basis of trying to control the spread of this nuclear technology.

In the short term, that is exactly what we should do and what I would do as
president of the United States. But A.Q. Khan, who developed the nuclear
weapon for Pakistan, we know has already spread some of this technology to
other places.

And I think this ad hoc policy does not work over the long term. And what I
believe we should be doing over the long term and what I will do as president
of the United States, besides dealing with these short-term threats -- which
are very serious and should be taken seriously -- I, as president of the
United States, want to do what some Republicans and some Democrats have said,
which is to lead a long-term initiative -- international initiative -- to
actually rid the world of nuclear weapons, because that is the only way to
make the world safer and secure and to keep America safe.


 Well... 

(CROSSTALK)


 Well, let me say first, this is the very point I was making a few minutes ago. 

In the short term, we're faced with very, very serious threats about the
possibility of these nuclear weapons getting in the hands of a terrorist group
or somebody who wants to attack the United States of America.

The first thing is we have to immediately find out who's responsible and go
after them. And that is the responsibility of the president of the United
States.

Because if someone has attacked us with a nuclear weapon, it means they have
nuclear technology, it means they could have gotten another nuclear weapon
into the United States that we're unaware of. We have to find these people
immediately and use every tool available to us to stop them.

Secondly, it is the responsibility of the United States -- and by the way,
what I'm about to say doesn't just apply to a nuclear attack. It applies to
this crisis that exists in Pakistan right now with the assassination of
Benazir Bhutto.

It is the responsibility of the president in times like this to be a force for
strength, principled strength, but also calmness.

It is enormously important for the president of the United States not to take
-- to react and to react strongly, but to do it in a way that is calming for
the American people and calming for the world.

Because it would be an enormous mistake for the president of the United States
to take a terrible, dangerous situation where millions of Americans or
thousands of Americans could have lost their lives, and to ratchet up the
rhetoric and make it worse than it already is.


 Thank you. No, you're welcome. You're more than welcome. 

Let me just say a quick word about this.

You know, Senator Obama and I have differences. We do. We have a difference
about health care, which he and I have talked about before.

We have a fundamental difference about the way you bring about change. But
both of us are powerful voices for change.

And if I might add, we finished first and second in the Iowa caucus, I think
in part as a result of that.

Now, what I would say this: Any time you speak out powerfully for change, the
forces of status quo attack. That's exactly what happens.

It's fine to have a disagreement about health care. To say that Senator Obama
is having a debate with himself from some Associated Press story I think is
just not -- that's not the kind of discussion we should be having.

I think that every time this happens, what will occur -- every time he speaks
out for change, every time I fight for change, the forces of status quo are
going to attack -- every single time.


 And what we have to remember -- and this is the overarching issue here, because what we really need in New Hampshire and in future state primaries, is we need an unfiltered debate between the agents of change about how we bring about that change. Because we have differences about that. 

But the one thing I do not argue with him about is he believes deeply in
change. And I believe deeply in change.

And any time you're fighting for that -- I mean, I didn't hear these kind of
attacks from Senator Clinton when she was ahead. Now that she's not, we hear
them.

And any time you speak out -- any time you speak out for change, this is what
happens.


 Can I respond briefly to that? 


 Thank you very much. 

What I would say in response to the discussion that just took place is we have
to understand what's at stake. Nobody cares about hearing a bunch of
politicians fight. They're not the slightest bit interested in that, and they
shouldn't be interested in it.

What's at stake here is a fight for the future of the middle class. And we do
have different perspectives on how we fight for the middle class, how we fight
for jobs, how we fight for health care.

And I believe, and I believe it very strongly, that there are entrenched
special interests very well-financed -- some examples are drug companies,
insurance companies, oil companies, et cetera -- that stand between America
and the change that we need.


 And I think if you defend the way the system works, it's very hard to take those people on. 

I believe -- and it's -- I've fought these people. I'm 54 years old. I've been
fighting these people, these irresponsible corporations -- and there are good
corporations in America, Charlie, and I want to point that out, good
corporations, good employers. Costco. AT&amp;T, for example, is now working to
help unionize some of their offices and to bring jobs back...

(CROSSTALK)


 Let me finish this, though. I want to finish this. 

The point is this: I think there are differences between us about how we fight
for the future of the middle class. And I believe you have to be willing to
take on these entrenched special interests. And I think if you're not willing
to do it, it is impossible to bring about the change that the country needs.


 It is the responsibility of the president of the United States and the commander in chief to make policy decisions. 

It is the responsibility -- of course, I would always listen to my uniformed
military leadership -- directly. Not filtered through civilians -- directly.

But if you look at what happened in Iraq when the Brits began to pull their
troops out, in the part of Iraq where those troops were located, there was a
significant reduction in violence.

What the whole purpose -- just to be clear with people -- the whole purpose
for the surge was to create some environment where there could be political
progress and political reconciliation between Sunni and Shia.

Everyone believes -- even George Bush acknowledges that that's what we're
trying to accomplish.

The question is, how do you get there?

Look at the loss of American lives; $600 billion and counting; and there's
been essentially no political progress.

I don't believe -- and I think others would agree -- that there will be
political progress until we make it clear that we're going to stop propping
the Sunni and Shia up with American lives and with American taxpayer dollars.

So what we need to do -- and let me be very specific -- and this is what I
will do as president: In the first year that I am president, I will pull
40,000 to 50,000 troops out very quickly.

I will continue a steady redeployment of combat troops out of Iraq until they
are all out within about nine to 10 months.

If my military leadership says we need some more time to make sure that we can
do this in the most effective way and the most efficient way and the safest
way for my troops, of course I'd be listening to what they have to say.

But I will end combat missions in Iraq in the first year, and there will be no
permanent military bases.

We have to end this war, and the only way to end the war is to end the
occupation, which is what I will do as president.


 What's my question? 

(LAUGHTER)

No, I'm glad that people like me, Hillary. I'm glad they like...

(CROSSTALK)


 No, I think what matters -- we've had a lot of conversation about the first day in the White House. I think we ought to picture what that first day in the White House would be for each of us. 

I'll just speak for myself. You know, I'm the candidate up here who's never
taken a dime from a Washington lobbyist in my entire time in public life or a
dime from a special interest PAC.

The first day that I'm president of the United States, there will be no
corporate lobbyists working in my White House. There will be no lobbyist who's
lobbied for foreign governments.

And this is a very personal cause for me, because I come from a family -- my
father is in the audience tonight -- where my father worked for 37 years in
the mills. He didn't get a chance, like I did, to have a college education.

And this is a fight for the middle class and families just like the one I grew
up with. My grandmother, who helped raise me, had a fifth or sixth grade
education, came from a family of share-croppers, she worked in the mill every
day so that I could have the chances that I've had.

And this -- I spent 20 years fighting irresponsible corporations in
courtrooms.


 I know what it takes to fight these people and win. 

But here's what I would want people to know. What I want people to know is,
this battle is deep inside me and it is personal.

And it matters whether it's personal or not, because is if it's either
academic or political, when the tough fight comes, you'll walk away from it.
You'll do what's political.

This fight is deeply personal to me. I've been engaged in it my whole life, to
fight for the middle class, to fight against powerful special interests. And
it is a fight I will wage on behalf of the American people as president of the
United States and win, as I have for 54 years.


 Sure. 


 Yes. 


 Yes. 


 Absolutely. 


 Absolutely. I could tell you exactly one -- I'll give you one very specific example, a big example. 

When the Democrats finally took over the United States Senate, the first issue
that was brought to the table was the so-called patient's bill of rights, so
that patients and families could make their own health care decisions.


 What's happening now is insurance companies are running all over people. I mean, the case of Nataline Sarkisyan, which a lot of the audience will be familiar with -- 17-year-old girl who lost her life a couple of weeks ago because her insurance company would not pay for a liver transplant operation. 

She had health insurance, but the insurance company wouldn't pay for it. They
finally caved in a few hours before she died.

We need a president who will take these people on. What we did -- and I didn't
do it alone, don't claim to have done it alone -- but I, Senator McCain, who
was here earlier, Senator Kennedy, the three of us wrote the Patient's Bill of
Rights. The three of us took on the powerful insurance industry and their
lobby, every single day of the fight for the Patient's Bill of Rights. And we
got that bill through the United States Senate and got it passed.

And I'm proud of having done that.

But that's just an example of why this battle is personal for me. You know, we
need a president who believes deeply -- in here -- believes deeply in this
battle.

And it is personal for me. When I see these lobbyists roaming around
Washington, D.C., taking all the politicians to cocktail parties, I mean, the
picture I get in my head is my father and my grandmother going in that mill
every day so that I could have the chances I've had.

Where is their voice in this democracy? When are they going to get heard? They
need a president who will stand up for them, and so does every American who's
listening to this debate.


 Good idea. 


 They can't eat as much if they're standing up, Charlie. 


 Because George Bush killed it. 


 Absolutely. 


 Let Hillary talk. Let her talk. 


 OK, can we speak to this? Can we speak to this? 


 I want to say -- I just want to say a quick word about this. 

You know, it is true that these entrenched interests -- whether you're talking
about oil companies, drug companies, gas companies, whoever, these entrenched
interests are literally stealing our children's future.

They have a stranglehold on this democracy. And they are having an incredibly
destructive force on the middle class, on families being able to do what my
family has done, and so many who are sitting here have been able to do.

And the problem is you can't be with those people, take their money and then
challenge them. It doesn't work.

You have to be willing to actually stand up and say no, no to lobbyists'
money, no to PAC money, no corporate lobbyists working for me in the White
House.


 If you intend to take them on, and if it is personal for you -- and this is extraordinarily personal for me -- if it's personal for you, then you can be successful bringing about the change. 

Teddy Roosevelt -- just one quick example -- Teddy Roosevelt -- Teddy
Roosevelt, a great American president: He didn't make deals with the
monopolies and the trusts. Teddy Roosevelt took them on, busted the
monopolies, busted the trusts. That's what it's going to take.

We have a battle in front of us. We do.

I don't think we have a problem with politicians in Washington spending enough
time with lobbyists and going to cocktail parties. They do it all the time.
They do it every single day.

And I'll tell you who's paying the price for those cocktail parties: Ed and
Nataline Sarkisyan, every single American who doesn't have health care
coverage, everybody who's going to the gas pump and paying so much for their
gas.

When are we going to have a president who actually takes these people on?
That's what I'm going to do.

(CROSSTALK)


 Give me 30 seconds on this, because you just said something... 


 I actually completely agree that it's the responsibility of the president to unite and galvanize the American people. It is also the responsibility of the president, and I will do it, to work with members of Congress to get things done. 

But these entrenched monied interests that have a stranglehold on the middle
class, that are doing incredibly destructive to American jobs and the health
care system, energy, all taxes, trade, they're in everything -- absolutely
everything, you cannot nice these people to death. It doesn't work.

I have been in the trenches fighting them for my whole adult life. And it
takes strength, backbone, fight and you have to take them on.

Yes, Barack, I agree with you completely that the best -- we need to unite
America and we need to galvanize the American people.

And, Bill, I completely agree with what you just said. This is not a fight
with politicians. And this is certainly not a fight with the American people.

It is a fight for the American people against those people who are stopping
the change.


 Thank you. 

What you see happening in America today, if you're president of the United
States and as you are looking at this from altitude, is you see a very few
Americans getting wealthier and wealthier; you see the biggest corporations in
America's profits through the roof. ExxonMobil just made $40 billion -- record
profits.

All of that happening at the same time that we have 47 million people with no
health care; 37 million who will wake up in this country tomorrow worried
about feeding and clothing their children. Tonight, 200,000 men and women who
wore the uniform of the United States of America and served this country
honorably will go to sleep under bridges and on grates.


 It's time for us to say -- and it's time for the president to say -- enough is enough. 

This is a battle for the future of our children. This is a battle for the
middle class.

Let's take jobs, which we haven't talked about. We've touched on a lot of
other things; we haven't talked about jobs. We've had a trade and tax policy
that is bleeding American jobs. And all it has done is pad the profits of the
biggest multinational corporations in America.

You talk about professors here, at this college. Let me say a word...


 Yes, it was a mistake. 

(LAUGHTER)

But we are -- I saw a projection, just a week or so ago, suggesting that
America could lose as many as 20 million to 30 million more jobs over the next
decade.

Think about that for a minute: 30 million.

And who's the most at-risk group?


 College graduates. This is not just people who are working in mills and working in factories who have been devastated by this -- completely devastated. These are middle class families. These are college graduates and their jobs at risk. 

We need a different tax policy, a different trade policy where the first
question is -- and this is what I will ask when I am president of the United
States -- is this trade proposal, is this tax proposal, is it good for
working, middle class Americans? That's the question.


 At least. 


 I was about to say... 

(CROSSTALK)


 I already figured this out... 

OBAMA (?): That was a good (inaudible).

(LAUGHTER)


 If you're going to pick the one for me, it was when I made the horrendous mistake of teasing Hillary about her jacket. 

(LAUGHTER)

And I want her to know, I think you look terrific tonight.

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)




 Actually, I think Chuck Hagel is a good choice. But I -- if you listen to these questions, they all have exactly the same thing, which is how do we bring about big change? And I think that's a fundamental threshold question. And the question is: Do you believe that compromise, triangulation will bring about big change? I don't. I think the people who are powerful in Washington -- big insurance companies, big drug companies, big oil companies -- they are not going to negotiate. They are not going to give away their power. The only way that they are going to give away their power is if we take it away from them. (APPLAUSE) 

And I have been standing up to these people my entire life. I have been
fighting them my entire life in court rooms -- and beating them.


 If you want real change, you need somebody who's taking these people on and beating them... 


 ... over and over and over. 


 I'm not for reparations. I can answer that question. But I think there are other things we can do to create some equality that doesn't exist in this country today. Today there was a report that, right here in Charleston, African-Americans are paying more than their white counterparts for mortgages than any other place in America, any other place in the United States of America. (APPLAUSE) And here's an example. What is the conceivable explanation for this, that black people are paying more for their mortgage? And, by the way, it's not just low-income African Americans; it's high-income African-Americans. There's absolutely no explanation for this. It goes to the basic question that I raised just a few minutes ago. 

To have a president that's going to -- is going to fight for equality, fight
for real change, big change, bold change, we're going to have to somebody --
we can't trade our insiders for their insiders. That doesn't work. What we
need is somebody who will take these people on, these big banks, these
mortgage companies, big insurance companies, big drug companies. That's the
only way we're going to bring about change. And I will do that as president.
(APPLAUSE)


 Well, let me say first that on the question that was just asked to Senator Obama... 


 I'm going to stay on your question. I promise I'll answer that question. But the first thing I want to say -- and I want to speak for everybody, I believe, on this stage -- anybody who's considering not voting for Senator Obama because he's black or for Senator Clinton because she's a woman, I don't want their vote. I don't want them voting for me. 

(APPLAUSE)

I think what Elizabeth was saying was -- to answer your question, what
Elizabeth was saying was there are very important issues facing women in this
country. More women are affected by the minimum wage than men are affected by
the minimum wage. I have been the most aggressive -- in fact, I would
challenge every Democrat on this stage today to commit to raising the minimum
wage to $9.50 an hour by the year 2012.

(APPLAUSE)

Second, there are more women in poverty than men in poverty. And I have made
this a central cause in my life and a central cause in my campaign. More women
have difficulty getting the health care that they need than men do. And I was
the first person to come out with a comprehensive, truly universal health care
plan.


 Those are issues -- listen, Senator Clinton has a long history of speaking out on behalf of women. She deserves to be commended for that. But I believe that on the issues that directly affect women's lives, I have the strongest, boldest ideas and can bring about the change that needs to be brought. 


 I think Reverend Longcrier asks a very important question, which is whether fundamentally -- whether it's right for any of our faith beliefs to be imposed on the American people when we're president of the United States. I do not believe that's right. I feel enormous personal conflict about this issue. I want to end discrimination. I want to do some of the things that I just heard Bill Richardson talking about -- standing up for equal rights, substantive rights, civil unions, the thing that Chris Dodd just talked about. But I think that's something everybody on this stage will commit themselves to as president of the United States. But I personally have been on a journey on this issue. I feel enormous conflict about it. As I think a lot of people know, Elizabeth spoke -- my wife Elizabeth spoke out a few weeks ago, and she actually supports gay marriage. I do not. But this is a very, very difficult issue for me. And I recognize and have enormous respect for people who have a different view of it. 


 It's not. I mean, I've been asked a personal question which is, I think, what Reverend Longcrier is raising, and that personal question is, do I believe and do I personally support gay marriage? 


 The honest answer to that is I don't. But I think it is absolutely wrong, as president of the United States, for me to have used that faith basis as a basis for denying anybody their rights, and I will not do that when I'm president of the United States. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I don't think any of our troops die in vain when they go and do the duty that's been given to them by the commander in chief. No, I don't think they died in vain. 

But I think the question is -- the question is: What is going to be done to
stop this war?

The other people have raised the question earlier. And in fact, Senator Obama
spoke just a minute ago about the White House agreeing that the parliament,
the Iraqi parliament could take a month-long vacation because it was too hot,
while our men and women are putting their lives on the line every day.

Here's my question. While the Iraqi parliament is on vacation, is George Bush
going to be on vacation in Crawford, Texas?

What we need to do is turn up the heat on George Bush and hold him responsible
and make this president change course.

(APPLAUSE)

It is the only way he will change course. He will never change course unless
he's made to do it.


 Anyone who has any question about whether women can serve this country honorably in the military should meet Sally Bardon (ph), who's sitting with my wife Elizabeth down there. She flew fighter jets, F-16s, into the first 15 minutes of the war in Iraq. Flew over Baghdad. 

(APPLAUSE)

She put her life at risk, at the very beginning of the war. Anybody who has
any questions about whether women can serve courageously and honorably, need
to meet women like Sally Bardon (ph).


 Yes, and I think actually Senator Clinton's right though. Before that meeting takes place, we need to do the work, the diplomacy, to make sure that that meeting's not going to be used for propaganda purposes, will not be used to just beat down the United States of America in the world community. 

But I think this is just a piece of a bigger question, which is, what do we
actually do? What should the president of the United States do to restore
America's moral leadership in the world. It's not enough just to lead with bad
leaders. In addition to that, the world needs to hear from the president of
the United States about who we are, what it is we represent.


 That, in fact, we believe in equality, we believe in diversity, that they are at the heart and soul of what the United States of America is. 


 Ms. Burns, who was the high school English teacher who made me believe that somebody can come from a little town in North Carolina where their daddy worked in the mill and do just about anything if they really believe in themselves. 


 I've had four children, and all of them have gone to public school. I've got two kids... 

(APPLAUSE)

... who are actually here with me in Charleston tonight, two kids, Emma Claire
and Jack, just finished the third grade in public school in North Carolina,
and Jack just finished the first grade in public school in North Carolina.


 Well, Elizabeth and I have had sort of an unusual experience for parents, because Elizabeth likes to say that was made a member of AARP when she was pregnant with Jack, our last child. 


 We have had four children. Our two youngest children are now nine and seven. So we have been through the whole experience, including kids who have grown up. 

Yes, the answer is we have taught our younger children when they were young
how to look for the signs of wrong touching, any kind of what would be sexual
abuse, inappropriate touching. And we have taught our children as they got
older, all -- I think, using medically appropriate terms -- all that they
needed to know to be properly educated.


 Wind, solar, cellulose-based biofuels are the way we need to go. I do not favor nuclear power. We haven't built a nuclear power plant in decades in this country. There is a reason for that. The reason is it is extremely costly. It takes an enormous amount of time to get one planned, developed and built. And we still don't have a safe way to dispose of the nuclear waste. It is a huge problem for America over the long term. 

I also don't believe we should liquefy coal. The last thing we need is another
carbon-based fuel in America. We need to find fuels that are in fact
renewable, clean, and will allow us to address directly the question that has
been raised, which is the issue of global warming, which I believe is a
crisis.


 Yes. 


 No, because the only way to provide universal coverage is to mandate that everyone be covered. 

But I want to say, you know, I came out with a universal plan several months
ago. A couple of months later, Senator Obama came out with a plan. He's made a
very serious proposal, and I'm not casting aspersions on his plan. I think
it's a very serious proposal. It just doesn't cover everybody. The only way to
cover everybody is to mandate it.

And the stories we have just heard, from diabetes, to Alzheimer's, to cancer
-- there are millions of people in this country who are suffering so badly.
And just this past week -- in fact, you were with me on the third day -- I
went on a three-day poverty tour in America.

The last day, I was with a man in western Virginia, in the Appalachian
mountains -- 51 years old, three years younger than me.


 He'd been born with a severe cleft palate, and he was proud of the fact that someone had finally volunteered to correct it. 

He had not been able to talk -- I want to finish this. He had not been able to
talk until it was fixed.

Here was the problem. It was fixed when he was 50 years old.

For five decades, James Lowe (ph) lived in the richest nation on the planet
not able to talk because he couldn't afford the procedure that would've
allowed him to talk. When are we going to stand up and do something about
this?

We have talked about it too long. We have got to stand up to the insurance
companies and the drug companies that Barack just spoke about. It is the only
way we're ever going to bring about real change. We should be outraged by
these stories.


 As president of the United States, we will embrace and lift up all Americans, whatever their faith beliefs or whether they have no faith beliefs, as Stephen just spoke about. That's what America is. 

Now, my faith is enormously important to me personally. It's gotten me through
some hard times, as I'm sure that's true of a lot of the candidates who are on
this stage.

But it is crucial that the American people know that as president it will not
be my job -- and I believe it would be wrong -- for me to impose my personal
faith beliefs on the American people or to decide any kind of decision, policy
decision, that will affect America on the basis of my personal faith beliefs.

(APPLAUSE)


 I admire what Senator Clinton has done for America, what her husband did for America. 

I'm not sure about that coat.

(LAUGHTER)


 How about a little hope and optimism? Where did it go? You know, I listened to this debate, and this is what I hear. 


 First of all, I think we have a clear path for America and for our friends on Iran, which Senator Clinton just spoke about. And that path is to work with our friends in Europe to put up a choice between carrots and sticks on the table for the Iranian people. Because there is a division between the Iranian people and their radical leader, Ahmadinejad. There's no question about that. We can take advantage of that. We should take advantage of that, drive a wedge between the two. 

In the case of Pakistan, the truth of the matter is: Musharraf is not a
wonderful leader, but he provides some stability in Pakistan. And there is a
great risk, if he's overthrown, about a radical government taking over.

They have a nuclear weapon. They're in constant tension with India, which also
has a nuclear weapon, over Kashmir. I mean, it's a dangerous, volatile
situation.

But the last thing I want to say about this is it's not shocking that -- first
of all, I think Senator Obama is entitled to express his view. And it's not
shocking that people who have been in Washington a long time criticize him
when he comes along and expresses his view.


 I think his view adds something to this debate, and I think he ought to be able to express it. 


 On which issue? 


 I personally think, and I would as president, not talk about hypotheticals in nuclear weapons. I think that's not a healthy thing to do. I think what it does for the president of the United States is it effectively limits your options. And I do not want to limit my options, and I don't want to talk about hypothetical use of nuclear weapons. 

I would add to that that I think what the president of the United States
should actually do, beyond stopping bunker-buster nuclear weapons, which this
administration's moving forward with, is what America should do and what I
would do as president, is to actually lead an international effort over time
to eliminate nuclear weapons from the planet. That's the way to make the
planet more secure.

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, let me just say -- I have a slightly different view. Here's what I believe. I think we were out of power in the Congress for 13 years. In November of 2006, the Democrats took over the Congress again. I think there was a reason for that. Because the Democrats in November of 2006 stood for change. 

America wants change in the most serious way. And if we become the party of
status quo in 2008, that's a loser.


 If we... 


 ... maintain -- but let me finish. If we maintain the momentum of change, yes, we will win again in 2008. I think that's the question. And the real question for Democratic caucus-goers and voters across this country is, "Who's most likely to bring about change?" 

Here's what I believe: I don't believe you can change this country without
taking on very entrenched interests in Washington, including lobbyists, that
stand between us and the change America needs. And I don't believe you can do
it by sitting at a table, negotiating with them and trying to bring them
together.

These people will never give away their power voluntarily. We have to take
their power away from them. This is what I've been doing my whole life, and
that is why I believe I am the candidate who can bring change to this country.

(APPLAUSE)


 Listen, Senator Clinton, both as first lady and as a United States senator, has done a terrific job. She's been in Washington a long time. I've asked -- Senator, I have never taken money from Washington lobbyists. 


 Senator Obama is not taking it in this campaign. I applaud him for that. And I've said: Why don't we all make an absolutely clear statement that we are the Democratic Party; we're the party of the people; we are not the party of Washington insiders? 

And we can say it clearly and unequivocally, by saying we will never take
another dime from a Washington lobbyist.

(APPLAUSE)

I've asked the other candidates to join me in that.

(APPLAUSE)

And at least, until now, Senator Clinton's not done it.


 The distinction is not artificial. But first of all, Senator Clinton did a terrific job in the 1990s trying to do something about health care in this country. She deserves credit for that. 

But here's what I believe: The reason we don't have universal health care in
America today is because of the insurance industry, the drug companies and
their lobbyists.


 It's that simple. 

(APPLAUSE)

And, George, we need -- and there's a fundamental question here: Whether you
believe, whether voters believe the way we're going to have universal health
care is to deal with those people, to make a deal with them. I don't. I don't
think it'll work.

I don't think we should be taking their money. I think we ought to make it
absolutely clear that we're not going to take money from insurance company
lobbyists or drug company lobbyists, these big corporate lobbies, that
actually killed -- killed -- the health care effort that was done in the
1990s.


 Let me finish. Let me finish. 


 The question is -- the question is: What will bring change? What will bring change? 

My belief is you have to take these people on and beat them to bring change.
You can't sit at a table and negotiate with them.


 I couldn't hear the... 


 I think it would be hard to do by December. I think we can responsibly and in a very orderly way bring our troops out over the next nine or 10 months. 

But one thing I want to say, as I'm listening -- I know you're trying to
create a fight up here, I understand that, but any...


 ... any -- any Democratic president will end this war. That's what we know. 

And secondly...

(APPLAUSE)

... the differences between us, whether it's Senator Clinton or Senator Dodd
or Governor Richardson or Senator Biden, all of whom I have enormous respect
for, the differences between all of us are very small compared to the
differences between us and the Republican candidates, who the best I can tell
are George Bush on steroids.

(LAUGHTER)

They're going to keep this war going as long as it can possibly go. That's
exactly what's going to happen.


 I have prayed most of my life; pray daily now. He's enormously important to me. 

But the answer to the question is: No, I don't -- I prayed before my 16-year-
old son died; I prayed before Elizabeth was diagnosed with cancer. I think
there are some things that are beyond our control.

And I think it is enormously important to look to God -- and, in my case,
Christ -- for guidance and for wisdom. But I don't think you can prevent bad
things from happening through prayer.


 Well, the first thing I'd say is I think we've had a failed trade policy in America. 

The question seems to have been, on past trade agreements like NAFTA: Is this
trade agreement good for the profits of big multinational corporations?

And the answer to those questions on the trade agreements we've entered into
has been yes.


 It's been very good for multinational corporations. It has not been good for American workers. And in an Edwards administration, the first question I will ask in every single trade agreement we're considering is: Is this good for middle-class working families in America? That would be the threshold question. 

(APPLAUSE)

And, second, we will have real labor and environmental standards in the text
of the agreement, which I will enforce. We will have protections against
currency manipulation, which the Chinese are engaged in right now.

And then finally -- finally -- we will end these loopholes that actually
create tax incentives for companies to leave America and take jobs somewhere
else.

(APPLAUSE)

That needs to be brought to an end.


 Wasn't the question whether there's ever been anything that we didn't say? 


 That's what I thought it was. 

I think, in my case, that would be true about my vote on the war in Iraq.


 I was wrong to vote for this war. But, beyond that, I had huge internal conflict at the time about giving George Bush this authority. 

And I did talk about -- as all these other candidates have just said, I did
talk about the things that persuaded me to cast the vote. But what I didn't
express was the huge conflict I had, because I did not trust George Bush.

It turns out I was right not to have trusted him, and I cast the wrong vote.
But that's the one time, and probably the single biggest time that I can think
of.


 I agree with that. But we also need a home rescue fund for all the millions of Americans who are worried about losing their homes. 


 When I was a young boy, I came downstairs one morning. It was still dark outside. My father, who worked in mills all his life, was sitting at the kitchen table. The television was on. He was watching public television. And he'd never been able to go to college. And he was trying to learn from public television so he could get a better job in the mill. 

And I worked in the mill, myself, part-time, when I was younger. And I made
the decision then, whatever I did with my life -- didn't know that I'd be
running for president -- but whatever I did with my life, those are the people
that I would fight for, as long as I was breathing.


 I cannot make that commitment. I -- well, I can tell you what I would do as president. If I -- when I'm sworn into office come January of 2009, if there are in fact, as General Petraeus suggests, 100,000 American troops on the ground in Iraq, I will immediately draw down 40 (thousand) to 50,000 troops and, over the course of the next several months, continue to bring our combat troops out of Iraq until all of our combat troops are in fact out of Iraq. 

I think the problem is, and it's what you've just heard discussed, is, we will
maintain an embassy in Baghdad. That embassy has to be protected. We will
probably have humanitarian workers in Iraq. Those humanitarian workers have to
be protected. I think somewhere in the neighborhood of a brigade of troops
will be necessary to accomplish that -- 3,500 to 5,000 troops.

But I do say -- I want to add to things I just heard. I think that it's true
that everyone up here wants to take a responsible course to end the war in
Iraq. There are, however, differences between us, and those differences need
to be made aware. Good people have differences about this issue. For example,
I heard Senator Clinton say on Sunday that she wants to continue combat
missions in Iraq. To me, that's a continuation of the war. I do not think we
should continue combat missions in Iraq, and when I'm on a stage with the
Republican nominee come the fall of 2008, I'm going to make it clear that I'm
for ending the war. And the debate will be between a Democrat who wants to
bring the war to an end, get all American combat troops out of Iraq, and a
Republican who wants to continue the war.


 But can I just say, my only point is I don't have any doubt that Senator Clinton wants to take a responsible course. There is a difference, however, in how we would go about this, and I think Democratic primary voters are entitled to know that difference. And the difference is really very simple. I would have our combat troops out of Iraq over a period of several months, and I would not continue combat missions in Iraq. Combat missions mean that the war is continuing. I believe this war needs to be brought to an end. 


 I believe that America along with the rest of the world would have a responsibility to respond to genocide. It's not something we should do alone. In fact, if we do it alone, it could be counterproductive. 

In fact, if I can go one step further beyond what you just asked, I think the
president of the United States -- and I as president -- would have a
responsibility, as we begin to bring our combat troops out of Iraq, to prepare
for two possibilities. One is the possibility that -- the worst possibility,
which is that genocide breaks out, Shi'a try to systematically eliminate the
Sunni. I think we need to be preparing for that with the international
community now, not wait. And second, the possibility that this war starts to
spill outside the borders of Iraq. And that's a very difficult thing to
contain, because we know historically that it's difficult to contain a civil
war.


 Well, let me say first of all, I think there's a clear, responsible course for America with respect to Iran , and that responsible course is to recognize that Ahmadinejad is unpopular in his own country. And if we work with our friends in Europe and the European banking system, we can put a clear proposal on the table for the Iranian people, sticks and carrots -- the carrots being we will help you with your economy if in fact you give up your nuclear ambitions, the flip side being there will be severe economic sanctions if you don't. 

But I want to come back to a discussion that took place a few minutes ago, to
make sure everyone understands what Senator Gravel was talking about and what
Senator Clinton was talking about, because there was a very important vote
cast in the United States Senate today. And it was basically in a resolution
calling the Iranian Revolutionary Guard a terrorist organization. I voted for
this war in Iraq and I was wrong to vote for this war and I accept
responsibility for that. Senator Clinton also voted for this war. We learned a
very different lesson from that.

I have no intention of giving George Bush the authority to take the first step
on a road to war with Iran. And I think that vote today, which Senator Biden
and Senator Dodd voted against, and they were correct to vote against it, is a
clear indication of the approach that all of us would take with the situation
in Iran. Because what I learned in my vote on Iraq was, you cannot give this
president the authority and you can't even give him the first step in that
authority, because he cannot be trusted. And that resolution that was voted on
today was a very clear indication --


 Well, I didn't use the word "mismanagement." I think Senator Clinton actually worked, as first lady at that time, very hard for health care. 

But here's -- I listen to this discussion, and this is what I hear -- a bunch
of people who've been in Washington a long time who think that everything has
to be done there. It's like the rest of America doesn't exist. They're going
to have a bunch of Washington insiders who sit around tables together,
negotiate, compromise, insurance companies, drug companies, lobbyists, and
they're going to figure out together -- to the exclusion of the rest of
America -- what should be done about health care.

I think we actually need a president who's willing to go to Americans and make
the case for the need for universal health care. And the thing that I have
committed to do is the first day that I am president, I will say to the
Congress, to myself, to the vice president, to the members of the Cabinet, if
you have not passed universal health care by July of this year, July of 2009,
you lose your health care because there is no excuse for politicians in
Washington to have health care coverage when America has no health care
coverage. (Applause.)

And I -- if I -- can I add one last thing?


 That's true and so has America. I proposed universal health care for children at that point, and what is clear from this presidential campaign is I was the first presidential candidate -- others have followed me now, and that's a good thing, good thing for America -- but I was the first presidential candidate to lay out a specific truly universal health care plan. And the one thing I can tell you, as anybody who knows me, anybody who knows me knows I will never give up. 

What happened in '93 and '94 is we didn't get universal health care, but we
got NAFTA. And when I'm president of the United States, you have my word I
will never pull the universal health care bill. I will put everything I have
behind making sure that's enacted.


 Yes, absolutely. 

What I want is I want my children to understand everything about the
difficulties that gay and lesbian couples are faced with every day, the
discrimination that they're faced with every single day of their lives. And I
suspect my two younger children -- Emma Claire, who's nine, and Jack, who's
seven -- will reach the same conclusion that my daughter, Cate, who's 25, has
reached, which is she doesn't understand why her dad is not in favor of same-
sex marriage, and she says her generation will be the generation that brings
about the great change in America on that issue.

So I don't want to make that decision on behalf of my children. I want my
children to be able to make that decision on behalf of themselves, and I want
them to be exposed to all the information, even in -- did you say second
grade? Second grade might be a little tough, but even in second grade to be
exposed to all --


 \-- to all of those possibilities because I don't want to impose my view. Nobody made me God. I don't get to decide on behalf of my family or my children, as my wife, Elizabeth, who's spoken her own mind on this issue. I don't get to impose on them what it is that I believe is right. 

But what I will do as president of the United States is I will lead an effort
to make sure that the same benefits that are available to heterosexual couples
-- 1,100, roughly, benefits in the federal government -- are available to
same-sex couples; that we get rid of DOMA, the Defense Of Marriage Act; that
we get rid of "don't ask, don't tell," which is wrong today, was wrong when it
was enacted back in the 1990s.

I will be the president that leads a serious effort to deal with the
discrimination that exists today.


 No, sir, you cannot, and I would say that the single most important thing for anybody running for president is to be willing to be honest with America. You cannot solve this problem just by setting up a bipartisan commission. All of us are for that. You cannot solve this problem just by growing the economy. All of us are for that. 

But the American people deserve to hear the truth. They have heard so much
politician double-talk on this issue. That's the reason young people don't
believe Social Security's going to be there for them. Why would you possibly
trust a bunch of politicians who say the same thing over and over and over --
"We're going to grow our way out of this" -- but nothing changes, nothing
changes.

The honest truth is there are hard choices to be made here. The choice I would
make as president of the United States is on the very issue that you've asked
about, which is the cap, and I have to say, I have some difference with my
friend, Chris Dodd, who I agree with a lot. But I don't understand why
somebody who makes $50 million a year pays Social Security tax on the first
$97,000, and somebody -- and not all the rest, while somebody who makes
$85,000 a year pays Social Security tax on every dime of their income.


 I'm sorry, Chris. Let me just finish. I'll let you respond, but I want to say one last thing about this. 

I do have some difference with some of our colleagues who I've heard talk
about this. I think we have to be very careful to protect the middle class,
so, specifically -- if I can be very specific -- what I would do as president
is I would create a protective zone between 97,000 (dollars) up to around
200,000 (dollars) because there are a lot of firefighter couples, for example,
that make $100(,000), $115,000 a year. We don't want to raise taxes on them.
But I do believe that people who make $50 (million), $75 (million), $100
million a year ought to be paying Social Security taxes on that income.


 Wait, wait, wait, and Edwards. 


 What was the question? 


 I would not. 


 Yes. 


 No. 


 No. So that was less than 30 seconds. 

(LAUGHTER)


 The only thing I would -- I agree with what's been said. The only thing I would add is the problem is much bigger than this specific hypothetical illustrates. Because what's happened is, what America is has been undermined over the last seven years. And torture is a component of that, or the condoning of torture is a component of it. But it is only one component. 

In addition to the torture, we need to be ending this war in Iraq. I will
close Guantanamo, which I think is a national embarrassment. The idea that the
United States of America would hold anybody without a right to a hearing
undermines everything that we represent.

No more secret prisons. Not when I'm president of the United States.

And not only no more secret prisons; I will, the first day that I'm president,
end the illegal spying on the American people.


 Well, first of all, I think if you look at my entire life, I am proud of what I've spent my life doing. I'm not perfect. There's not a single person on this stage who's perfect, but I came from a family. 

I was born into nothing. I was brought home to a two-room house in a mill
village. I have spent my entire life fighting for the kind of people that I
grew up with. They worked in the mill with my father. And I don't apologize
for the fact that I have worked hard and built a life which I hope will make
life easier for my children. I'm proud of that. I'm not ashamed of that.

And I am proud of having stood up for the people that I grew up with. It's
what I have done my entire life. I did it for 20 years as lawyer. It's what
I've done every minute that I've been in public life.

It is the reason that I've been going around the country helping organize
workers into unions. It is the reason we started a College for Everyone
program for low-income kids. It is the reason Elizabeth and I started an
after-school program for kids who otherwise would have no chance to go to an
after-school program, having access to technology.

I'm proud of what I've done with my life, and I do not apologize for it.


 And I do not apologize for it. 


 But look at what I've done. Look at what I've done. 


 No, wait a second. You asked me the question. 


 Please let me respond. 


 Look at what I've done. When that issue came up in New Orleans, what I did is went to ACORN, an organization I had worked with in New Orleans, and we actually set up a fund to help people whose homes were being foreclosed on in New Orleans. 

I helped raise the money for that fund. Elizabeth and I made a big
contribution to it ourselves, because we feel -- I feel a personal commitment
to help families whose lives have been devastated. It's why I have made
central to my entire campaign the issue of poverty in America.

And I am perfectly happy to have anybody in America, any voter in New
Hampshire, any voter anywhere in this country judge me based on what I've done
in my life.


 It appears many times in the Bible, What you do onto the least of those, you do onto me. 


 Red Sox. 


 Thank you. What I believe is that this president, who, just a few weeks ago, was talking about World War III, he, the vice president, the neocons have been on a march to possible war with Iran for a long time. 


 We know that they've prepared contingency plans for a military attack. My view is that this has been going on since the famous axis of evil speech. 

And the United States Senate had an important responsibility in standing up to
him and stopping him on the vote on whether to declare the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard a terrorist organization.

The president says we're in a global war on terror, and then he declares the
Iranian Revolutionary Guard a terrorist organization and also a proliferator
of weapons of mass destruction.

It's absolutely clear and eerily similar to what we saw with Iraq, where they
were headed and there's a different approach, a smart approach, using our
friends in Europe and the European banking system to deal with it.


 Well, first of all, Senator Clinton and I just have an honest disagreement about this, but a very strong disagreement. 

I think it's very clear that Bush and Cheney have been rattling the saber
about Iran for a very long time. And I said very clearly when this vote took
place on the Iranian Revolutionary Guard that it was important for us to stand
up to them.


 Everyone at the table would acknowledge that Iran represents a serious issue for the Middle East and... 

(CROSSTALK)


 Let me finish, if I can. 


 If I can just finish, Dennis, for just a second -- but I do want it to be clear that, especially on an issue as big as Iran, it's very important for voters in Iowa, caucus-goers in Iowa, New Hampshire voters, to understand the differences. 


 And I do believe very strongly that it was important for us to stand up. Because what Bush and Cheney did after the vote in the Senate, is they declared the Iranian Revolutionary Guard a terrorist organization and a proliferator of weapons of mass destruction. 


 Well, first of all, diplomacy -- declaring a military group sponsored by the state of Iran a terrorist organization, that's supposed to be diplomacy? 

And I would add, this has to be considered in the context that -- Senator
Clinton has spoken about me; let me just respond -- this has to be considered
in the context that Senator Clinton has said she agrees with George Bush
terminology that we're in a global war on terror, then she voted to declare a
military group in Iran a terrorist organization. What possible conclusion can
you reach other than we are at war?


 And so I have a very -- very different view about what you need to do to stand up to Bush. 


 I just want to be clear to the listeners that we have a real division here. I mean, among the Democratic candidates, there's only one that voted for this resolution. And this is exactly what Bush and Cheney wanted. 


 Second, there is a clear path for America on Iran. They've got a president, Ahmadinejad, who is unpopular in own country. We have the capacity to work with our European allies and the European banking system to put a proposal of stick and carrots on the table that actually will help influence their behavior. 

The Iranian people, in many ways, do not support this guy. And they're looking
for a path. We need to help provide that path by making a serious proposal
with our friends in Europe of sticks and carrots to help them with their
economy.


 Well, first of all, I think that what's driving this belief about America in the Muslim community around the world is the bullying, selfish, abusive behavior of George Bush and this administration. 

I do want to go back to one quick point. I listened to Senator Clinton talk
about what's happening inside Iran.

We know what's happening inside Iran. We know a great deal about what's
happening. We know, for example, that Ahmadinejad's candidates in the election
this -- December about a year ago got clobbered. We know that there's serious
political -- lack of political support for this man. And we have a huge wedge
there that's available to America.

But as to the Muslim community, I think that the most important thing for
America to do is to demonstrate that we have a responsibility, not just to
ourselves, but to humanity, and to help make education available, to fight
global poverty.


 We need to take serious steps to demonstrate that America is actually worthy of leadership. 


 The Edwards doctrine will be longer-term , visionary; not the kind of ad hoc foreign policy -- foreign policy of convenience that we've seen over the last seven years, but instead, looking at not only the short-term issues that American and the world faces -- I've talked about Iran; Pakistan; what's happening with North Korea; we're about to talk about China -- but also to think about what is it that America does over the long-term to strengthen not only our leadership role, but our ability to provide stability. 

And the key to that is for America both through our actions and through our
language from the president of the United States to demonstrate that we
respect people who grow up in different cultures with different faith beliefs,
that we respect people who have a different perspective than we do and we
intend to lead , but to work with those people, and for America, whereas
education, health, et cetera, to meet its responsibility to humanity.


 I think that what's happened with the last seven years of the Bush administration is America's faced, over the long term, with two very serious challenges, one of which they've been obsessed with, which is the issue of terrorism. 

The other is the rise and strength of China, which they've done virtually
nothing about, on any front, I mean, ranging from China sending dangerous toys
into the United States to our trade relationship with China to, as Robert just
mentioned, their buildup of their military, which they're doing opaquely. We
know very little about what they're actually doing.

On top of that, they're obsessed with their own internal economic development.
And that results in them propping up bad regimes like Sudan, like Iran.
They're doing incredible damage to the environment.

So the answer to the question is -- America continues to have serious economic
leverage with the Chinese and diplomatic leverage with the Chinese.


 Well, I think that's -- what we know is they're growing, they're strong. 

I think America's stronger today. And if we deal with these issues and we deal
with them in a serious way across the board, and we engage on these issues --
which we have not been doing and we see the consequences for American children
right now, with these dangerous lead-filled toys coming into the United
States, with this extraordinary trade deficit that we have, the growing of
their military. We see them propping up genocide in western Sudan and Darfur,
with their economic development there.

American must engage the Chinese on all of these issues.


 I want to expand on a point that Joe made, and he mentioned it and it was important, which is, what's happened is big corporate America is driving American policy with respect to China. They get their way and the American people lose. 

This is only one place that that happens, by the way.


 There are a bunch of things we need to do. We have country-of-origin labeling laws. They've been in place for years. But we don't enforce them. 


 But the starting place is to actually enforce the laws that exist here in the United States and their obligations in the WTO, neither of which are being done. 

They're not being done because corporate America drives so much of what
happens in Washington, whether it's trade policy that cost Americans millions
of jobs -- NAFTA, CAFTA, et cetera, whether it is the dangerous Chinese toys
coming into the United States of America, whether is is country-of-origin
labeling -- why is the president of the United States not saying to the
American people, to local communities, Buy local ?

It is good for the local economy. It is good for farmers. It is good on the
issue of global warming, because everything that comes from China carries an
enormous carbon footprint with it.


 Yes. 


 No, ma'am, I will not. 

(CROSSTALK)


 My kids will not have toys coming from China. 

(CROSSTALK)

(LAUGHTER)


 You hold them accountable in the WTO. America uses its diplomacy and economic leverage. We have enormous leverage with the Chinese. 

And I want to add on to one thing that Chris just said. This whole issue of
balance, if you look at what's happened -- and this didn't just happen under
George Bush; this has been going on for a decade and a half now -- in my home
town, the mill that my father worked in, the people that I grew up with, that
mill's closed now. The jobs are gone.

The same thing has happened in Newton, Iowa, and all across this state. I met
a man named Doug Bishop a few years ago who talked about having to look his
child in the eye and explain why her daddy, who had worked in that mill his
entire life -- that factory -- had lost his job and hadn't done anything
wrong, because his child did not understand.

American trade policy is catering to the interests of big corporate America.
It has been for a decade and a half. And we desperately need a president of
the United States who instead of asking is this going to help corporate
profits, is this actually going to stand up for American workers and American
jobs?


 Oh, no, I didn't. No, I said we have more leverage than they do. We do. I think everybody actually agrees with that. 

But our leverage is economic, our leverage is diplomatic. And we have leverage
within the WTO, which Senator Biden and others have spoken about.

But we have not held China accountable. And the result is the loss of American
jobs, the struggling of American families, the struggles of the middle class.

Those jobs helped support the middle-class and build the middle-class in this
country. And as we've already talked about, dangerous Chinese products coming
into the United States.


 What is fair to think is that we have had a trade policy that has cost America. My father, who worked in a mill for 37 years so that I could be -- and my brother and sister could have a better life than he had. And that mill that he worked in is gone. 

Jobs all across Iowa are gone. And the reason is because America has catered
to the interest of corporate profits; not the interests of the American middle
class, not the interests of American workers, and not the interests of these
manufacturing jobs.

Are there other things we need to do? Of course there are. America, to be
competitive over the long-term, needs a trade policy that works that looks out
for the interest of the middle class. But it also needs -- America needs -- to
be the most creative, best educated, most innovative work force on the planet.

Those two things are not mutually exclusive. They can both be done at the same
time.


 What I've actually said is there have been some serious academic studies done on this question. And the studies are not the same. They have not reached the same conclusions. 

I think that there is -- there is some confusion in the work that's been done
-- the research that's been done on this question.

But what I've also described are some of the things that I've seen firsthand.
The town -- the small town that I grew up in in North Carolina is now about
half Latino, Hispanic.

I did a poverty tour earlier this year that began in New Orleans, but I also
went through Mississippi. And in Canton, Mississippi, I met with a group of
workers who worked at a poultry plant there, largely Hispanic.

And the abuses that they described to me were extraordinary. There was a man
there who had been injured on the job, had his back broken, literally, on the
job, and was told by the company doctor that it was just a generic condition
and there was nothing they could do for him.

And what I consistently heard from the workers -- I've heard this all over the
place -- is they're not being paid in many cases for the work that they've
done; not being paid overtime; not being paid, in many cases, the minimum
wage.

And if they raise any question about it, the first question the employer asks
is, What is your status?


 Well, I think what the studies show is there are a lot of things driving down wages in the United States of America. One of those things, which I hope we have time to talk more about is the loss of good middle-class jobs, which has been accelerated under this administration but didn't begin under this administration. 

And I think there are a variety of things that are contributing to that. And
the great issue facing the next president -- and it will be facing me as
president -- is: What do we do to strengthen and grow the middle class?

And there are a whole range of things that we need to do, if we actually want
to save the middle class and strengthen the American economy.


 Well, the answer to this is not a short-term solution. I wish there were a clear short-term solution that would be effective. 

The answer to this is comprehensive immigration reform. That is ultimately the
answer.


 They're in a very vulnerable position. And what we want to make certain, and that we would do in my administration, is that we are enforcing the laws that apply to employers. People in this discussions have talked about enforcing the responsibilities of employers not to hire undocumented workers. That's true, and that is a responsibility, and I would do that as president until we had comprehensive immigration reform. 

But we can't continue to allow -- in my state we have agricultural workers who
are being taken advantage of and abused, and in many cases living in horrid,
horrid conditions.


 Well... 


 What we would do is we'd use the power of the federal government and the power of our regulatory agencies to ensure that these people are not being abused. 

Like the -- I'll give a specific example: the poultry workers that I met in
Canton, Mississippi. We would make certain that their work conditions were
safe. We'd make certain that they're in fact being paid for the work that
they're doing; if they're working overtime, that they're being paid for their
overtime.

Those are all things that we would do in my administration.


 Well, the first point is: Why is America not educating and training American workers to do these jobs? 

I mean, that's the starting point.


 And that's the reason. If American workers are actually competent to do those jobs, American workers should be doing those jobs. 

The whole purpose of the H1B visa program is to bring people from other places
who have to do jobs that we don't have American workers to do.

Now, I think there are two pieces to this. One is, if there are American
workers who can do the jobs, they should be doing them, as I just said. And
they will, when I'm president.

Second, if we don't have adequate American workers -- and this is the other
side of the equation, what Bill Gates and others would argue, and I've heard
the same arguments -- then that means America's not doing its job of educating
our young people.


 I believe that there are American workers who can do some of these jobs that people are being brought from other places to do. And I think those American workers, if they're there and available, should be doing the jobs. 

But you've got to give my 30 more seconds on this. Because you can' ignore the
underlying issue. The underlying issue is, are we making it easier for kids to
go to college?

Are we driving our young people into engineering, science, and math, the very
areas that we're talking about?

And are we doing it in a way that will strengthen the American economy over
the long-term?

Because if we don't -- if we are not the most creative, best educated, most
innovative workforce on the planet, it is very difficult for us to compete.


 Who I would choose as my vice president and whether... 

(LAUGHTER)

... to consider any of these people sitting at the table with me?

(LAUGHTER)


 They will. They will. 


 I think we have an enormous struggle to try to restore the power in the country and the democracy back to the American people, and take it away from big corporate interests, et cetera, who have taken over the democracy. 


 I think there are many ways to do that. And I think the starting place is to galvanize America to do it. But I think it is central to what we need to do for America. 


 Well, I just want to add one thing to what Governor Richardson just said. I think the truth of the matter is that the tax policy in America has been established by big corporations and the wealthiest Americans. 

That's why we have tax breaks for the top 1 percent and 2 percent. It's why
the profits of big corporations keep getting bigger and bigger, while most
working middle-class families are struggling.

So what we ought to be doing instead is getting rid of these tax breaks for
big -- the wealthiest Americans -- big tax breaks for companies that are
actually taking American jobs overseas.

This is insanity, when we're losing American jobs at the rate we are today.

And then, on top of that, we need to help middle-class families. I have
proposed specific ideas to help them save, to help them send their kids to
college, and to make sure that thy can pay for child care.


 All of these things are aimed at making sure that we have -- that we strengthen the middle class, that we can pay for things like universal health care -- I mean, you can't have universal health care, to be honest with people, unless you have a way to pay for it, and this is how we pay for it. 


 We've got so much at stake in this election. You know, what makes America America is at stake: jobs, the middle class, health care, preserving the environment in the world for future generations. 

But all those things are at risk. And why are they at risk? Because of
corporate power and corporate greed in Washington, D.C.

And we have to take them on. You can't make a deal with them. You can't hope
that they're going to go away. You have to actually be willing to fight.

And I want every caucus-goer to know I've been fighting these people and
winning my entire life. And if we do this together, rise up together, we can
actually make absolutely certain, starting here in Iowa, that we make this
country better than we left it.


 Leave it better than we started. 

(LAUGHTER)


 Whatever. Translation (inaudible). 


 I thought you did. 


 Well, what I would say is human rights should be central to the way America engages with the rest of the world, should be central to our trade policy. 

But if you look at what's happened with American trade policy -- you asked
about China a few minutes ago. Look at what America got: big corporations made
a lot of money, are continuing to make a lot of money in China.

But what did America get in return? We got millions of dangerous Chinese toys.
We lost millions of jobs.


 And right here in Iowa, the Maytag plant in Newton closed. A guy named Dough Bishop, who I got to know very well, had worked in that plant and his family had worked in that plant literally for generations. And his job is now gone. 

The same thing, by the way, happened in the plant that my father worked in
when I was growing up.

It is so important that we stop allowing these corporate powers and corporate
profits to run America's policy, whether it's trade policy, how we engage with
China.

This is not good for America. It's not good for American jobs. And it's not
good for working people in this country.


 Well, I want to get in. 

I think, first of all, we need to recognize what the obstacles are to the
change that everyone believes is necessary. And the obstacles are oil
companies, power companies, all those entrenched interests that stand between
America and the change that it needs.

And we do need a president who'll actually ask Americans to be patriotic about
something other than war, who will say to America, for us to deal with these
issues and deal with them in a serious way, whether it's cap-and-trade,
whether it's carbon -- cap-and-trade is what I propose -- but either way, it's
a serious effort to move America off its dependence on carbon-based fuels and
deal with what I think is a moral crisis, which is the future of the planet
for our children and our grandchildren.


 We have a responsibility to future generations, an enormous responsibility. Twenty generations that came before us, our parents, our grandparents, and did everything they could do to leave America better than they found it and to make certain that their children had a better life than they've had. 

That's what our responsibility is. Our moral responsibility is to rise up as a
nation, with the right kind of president and the right kind of leadership, and
go after these huge moral responsibilities that we're faced with.


 The starting place is to get the children young and get them on the right track, which is why we ought to have universal pre-K for four-year-olds in America. 

We also should go younger than that, to deal with the nutrition, health needs,
child care needs of younger children, based on some models that have been
developed here in Iowa and also in my state of North Carolina.

I think we ought to have a national teaching university, where we attract the
smartest, brightest young people in America to this university -- just like
the Naval Academy -- and we pay for their education, and they go out to the
places in America where we do desperately need them.

I think we ought to give bonus incentive pay to teachers who are willing to go
to the most difficult places.

We need to radically change No Child Left Behind. And if that doesn't work, we
should get rid of it. But there are huge changes that are needed in No Child
Left Behind.

And we need second-chance schools, because in so many places in America, we
still have two public school systems.


 I mean, I would never have been able to do what I've done in this country had I not had a great public school education. It was the foundation for everything that I've done. 

And what you see in America, is you see very wealthy suburban schools that get
everything they need, and then poor rural schools, poor inner city schools
that are struggling, having an extraordinarily difficult time.

I am committed to doing something to create one school system that works for
everybody.


 Well, I've already talked about education. You asked me about this at the beginning, I think. 

But what I would add on to that is I think if you think about -- if you think
about the period post-high school, post-K-12, post-early childhood education,
there's such enormous work today to make sure the kids get to go to college,
first of all.


 What I've suggested is that any young person in America who's willing to work when they're in college, we pay for their tuition and books at a state university or community college. 

And I also want us to think in a bigger way, in a more visionary way, about
what we do, over the long term, to create an infrastructure that allows
America's workforce, when they're 30, 35, 40, 45 to continue to be the best
educated, most innovative workforce on the planet. This is something America
needs.


 Well, as I'm listening, there are an awful lot of promises being made in the first year of the presidency. 

I think people deserve to know the truth: We're faced with huge, huge
challenges. And all the things that we want to do -- and I will end the war;
I'll close Guantanamo; I'll restore people's civil liberties; and I'll begin
the process of fighting for health care reform -- universal health care,
attacking global warming.

But none of those things are going to happen unless we have a president of the
United States who calls on the American people to join together to take this
democracy and take this country back.


 Because what's happening in America today is absolutely clear: We have a small group of entrenched interests, corporate powers, corporate greed, the most wealthy people in America who are controlling what's happening in the democracy, and we have to take it back... 


 ... starting right here in Iowa. 


 Well, here's what I believe. What I believe is that there are very well-financed insurance companies, drug companies, oil companies; some people argue that we're going to sit at a table with these people and they're going to voluntarily give their power away. 


 I think it is a complete fantasy. It will never happen. I don't think anybody in America wants to se politicians fighting with each other. But I think they understand that we have an epic battle in front of us to do what needs to be done for all the American people. 

All the things that we've talked about today -- health care, attacking global
warming, doing something about a tax policy that favors big corporations and
the richest Americans, doing something about our trade policy -- every single
one of those things depends on winning this battle.

We cannot do it if we don't win this battle. And all I would say is, I've been
fighting these people, big corporations, for 20 years in court rooms and then
in public life. I have been fighting them my entire life. And I have been
winning my entire life.

And if you want a fighter, to voters, to caucus-goers, you are looking at
somebody -- I'm 54 years old -- who has spent his entire life engaged in this
fight and winning this fight that we must win to be able to do the things that
we want to do for this country.


 Well, it is true that Bush has -- not only in the use of signing statements, but in every conceivable way, expanded the executive power. And this is not the way our founding fathers intended this government to operate. 

And what I will do is go back to the way signing statements have been used
historically.

And on top of that, I'm going to make absolutely certain that our three
branches of government are in fact co-equal. We don't have a royal presidency.
We don't have a king of the United States of America. Whatever George Bush
thinks, he is not king.

And it's important for the American people to understand that their president
respects them and understands that the Oval Office and the White House and the
presidency doesn't belong to one person. It belongs to the American people.


 To remember that in the midst of political hoopla, the glorification of politicians and presidential candidates, that somewhere in American tonight, a child will go to bed hungry; somewhere in America tonight, a family will have to go to the emergency room and beg for health care for a sick child; that somewhere in American today, a father who's worked for 30 or 40 years to support his family will lose his job. 


 And if that's what's at stake in this election. What's not at stake are any of us. All of us are going to be just fine no matter what happens in this election. 

But what's at stake is whether America is going to be fine.


 Well, the Iowa Caucuses are crucial for a very simple reason: Because instead of seeing us for a few seconds on television, the Iowa Caucus-goers see us up close, in their living rooms and in townhall meetings, which means they can judge what I and they believe is crucial to the next president, which is having somebody who's honest and sincere and can be trusted, and having somebody who's driven, in their gut, by the fight to make sure that every single American no matter where they live or the color of their skin gets the same opportunity in this country. 


 Well, I -- the only thing I would add is I had the perspective of living in the South, including at a time when there was segregation in the South, and I feel an enormous personal responsibility to continue to move forward. Now, we've made great progress, but we're not finished with that progress, and the struggles and sacrifice of Dr. King and many others who gave blood, sweat, tears, and in some cases their lives to move America toward equality. 

And I saw it. I saw it when four young men walked into a Woolworth luncheon
counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, and sat down, had the courage and
strength to do the right thing. And they literally stood up -- stood up on
behalf of African-Americans, on behalf of southerners, on behalf of Americans,
helped move this country forward in a really serious way.

And having seen the pain and the struggle and the sacrifice of so many up
close, because I lived with it -- I lived with it in my years growing up -- I
think we, all of us, have an enormous responsibility, not to go back but to go
forward.

And I would just add, I think, it goes far beyond the Democratic Party. This
is about American and about creating real equality in America across the
waterfront.


 Well, I think that the decision for every voter in this election should revolve around, first, whether you believe America needs change; if you do, who you think would be most effective in bringing about that change. We have different perspectives on that. 

I think the system in Washington is broken. I don't think it works. And I
think the American people -- middle-class Americans are struggling and
suffering. They can't pay for their health care. They're losing their jobs.
They can't pay for their kids to go to college.

Now, this is a very personal thing for me. Hillary mentioned a minute ago that
I grew up in a family of mill workers. I was the first person in my family to
actually be able to go to college. And so this battle for real opportunity for
everybody, the kind of chances I've had in my own life, is central to
everything I do. It is central to this campaign. It is a personal, personal
fight for me.

And I think the decision that voters make about who can best fight for the
middle class, who will never give up on the fight for universal health care,
who will actually stand up strongly and -- and fervently for the right to
organize, for unions to be able to organize in the workplace. These things are
not academic for me; they are my life. I believe in them to my soul. And I
will fight with every fiber of my being to make sure that everybody gets that
kind of opportunity.

And I think there are some differences on policy and perspective between the
three of us, and I hope we get a chance to talk more about that today.


 You know, I have to say, on behalf of my party -- and I've said this -- I've said this many times -- I'm proud of the fact that we have a woman and an African-American who are very, very serious candidates for the presidency. They both ask not to be considered on their gender or on their race. I respect that. 

I do believe, however, that it says really good things about America, and I
think, actually believe that both through these primaries and caucuses and in
the general election, that the American people are going to make decisions
based on who we are, what we stand for and what we're fighting for.


 Might have looked way or actually was that way? I don't think it was that way. I mean, my -- my job, as a candidate for president of the United States, is to speak the truth as I see it. I have spoken the truth. I will continue to speak the truth, whatever the consequences are and whatever the perception that -- that people have is. 

I do believe that I am a candidate for president who is fighting for change,
who believes that we have entrenched moneyed interests in this country that
are preventing the middle class from having a real chance.

And it's drug companies, insurance companies, oil companies, there are
lobbyists. Barack spoke about them just a few minutes ago. It's why I've
never, the whole time I've been in public life, taken a dime from a Washington
lobbyist or special-interest PAC, because I do believe those people stand
between America and the change that it so desperately needs, in real ways.
They're the reason we don't have universal health care. They're the reason we
have a trade policy that's cost America millions of jobs. They're the reason
we have an insane tax policy that actually gives tax breaks to American
companies sending jobs overseas.

The promise of America that I and millions of others have lived -- and we are
in Nevada tonight, a place that people come to in the thousands every day to
find the promise of America because they believe in it. It is central to
everything we are as a nation. And I do believe that that promise is being
jeopardized by very well- financed, monied interests. I believe that's the
truth, and I'm going to keep saying it.


 I think my greatest strength is that for 54 years I've been fighting with ever fiber in my being. In the beginning, the fight was for me. Growing up in mill towns and mill villages, I had to literally fight to survive. But then I spent 20 years in courtrooms fighting for children and families against really powerful, well-financed interests. 

I learned from that experience, by the way, that if you're tough enough and
you're strong enough and you got the guts and you're smart enough, you can
win. That's a fight that can be won. It can be won in Washington, too, by the
way. And I've continued that -- that fight my entire time in public life.

So I've got what it takes inside to fight on behalf of the American people and
on behalf of the middle class.

I think weakness -- I sometimes have a very powerful emotional response to
pain that I see around me. When I see a man like Donnie Ingram, who I met a
few months ago in South Carolina, who worked with for 33 years in the mill,
reminded me very much of the kind of people that I grew up with, who's about
to lose his job, has no idea where he's going to go, what he's going to do --
I mean, his dignity and self-respect is at issue, and I feel that in a really
personal way and in a very emotional way. And I think sometimes that can
undermine what you need to do.


 Well, the things that Senator Clinton just spoke about are correct. We need more transparency; we need to know what's actually happening. But the fundamental problem is what's happening at the core of the American economy. 

What's happening to the economy in America, if you look at it from --
distance, is we have economic growth in America; we still do. But almost the
entirety of that economic growth is with the very wealthiest Americans and the
biggest multinational corporations.

You ask any middle class family in America, and they will tell you they do not
feel financially secure. They're worried about their job; they're worried
about paying for health care; they're worried about how they're going to send
their kids to college; they're worried about, in many cases -- here in Nevada
particularly -- worried about their home being foreclosed on.

I spoke a few minutes ago about thousands of people coming to Nevada every day
to try to find the promise of America, to try to find a good job, a good home,
to meet the great moral test that all of us have as Americans, which is to
make certain that our children have a better life than we have. This is the
great challenge that we're facing in this election.

We talked about other historic moments. It is an historic moment for America
in this election. Are we going to do what our parents and our grandparents
did, who worked and struggled and suffered to ensure that we would have a
better life? They have now passed that torch to us, and it is our
responsibility and it will be my responsibility as president to ensure that
our children and our grandchildren have a better life than we had.


 Yeah. 


 I absolutely do. I should not have voted for that bankruptcy law. 

If you look at what's happening in America today, the -- the bankruptcies that
are occurring -- about half of them are the result of medical costs. And the
idea that any single mom who has a child who gets catastrophically sick and
incurs $30,000 of medical costs has to go into bankruptcy as a result and
can't be relieved of that debt makes absolutely no sense. And it's not fair,
and it's not right.

And I spoke for just -- just a few minutes ago about the great struggles that
the middle class are faced with in this country. And you hear it every single
day, because what's happening in America is, jobs are leaving, cost of
everything is going up -- health care, college tuition, everything. And -- and
on top of that, middle-class incomes are not going up. The incomes at the very
top are going up. Profits of big corporations are going up. But the -- but the
incomes of middle-class families are not going up.

So the question is, what do we do about it? Besides having somebody who truly
understands in a personal way what's happening, what would the president of
the United States do? There are a bunch of things we need to do.

We desperately need truly universal health care that covers every single
American and dramatically reduces health care costs. We do need, as Barack
spoke about just a few minutes ago, a radical transformation of the way we
produce and use energy. We can create at least a million new jobs in that
transition. We need a national law cracking down on predatory and payday
lenders that are taking advantage of our most vulnerable families.

We ought to raise the national minimum wage, which is going up to 7.25 an
hour. That's fine. It's not enough. The national minimum wage should be at
least $9-and-a-half an hour. It ought to be indexed to go up on its own.

We need to make it easier for kids to go to college. My proposal is that we
say to any young person in America who's willing to work when they're in
college, at least 10 hours a week, we'll pay for their tuition and books at a
state university or a community college. And that can be paid for by getting
rid of big banks as the intermediary in student loans. They make 4 (billion)
or $5 billion a year. That money ought to be going to sending kids to college.


 I get to do both to begin with? 


 (Laughs.) Okay. 

Well, let me start this question. This is about campaign finances. And let me
start it by saying the obvious, which is, all three of us have raised a great
deal of money in this campaign, so this is not preachy or holier-than-thou in
any possible way.

What we know is that all three of us want to do something about health care in
this country. We also know that until recently, Senator Clinton had raised
more money from drug companies and insurance companies than any candidate,
Democrat or Republican, until you passed her, Senator Obama, recently to go to
number one.

My question is, do you think these people expect something for this money?

Why do they give it? Do they think that it's for good government? Why do they
do it?


 As I don't either. 


 I think I've actually, among the three of us, been the most aggressive and said that I will have all combat troops out in the first year that I'm president of the United States. I will end combat missions. And while I'm president, there will be no permanent military bases in Iraq. 


 I just want to say, it is dishonest to suggest that you're not going to have troops there to protect the embassy. That's just not the truth. 

It may be great political theater and political rhetoric, but it's not the
truth.


 There is, however, a difference between us on this issue. And I don't think it's subtle. The difference is, I will have all combat troops out in the first year that I'm president, and there will be no further combat missions, and there will be no permanent military bases. 


 Is that a question? 


 My answer to that is, as long as you keep combat troops in Iraq, you continue the occupation. If you keep military bases in Iraq, you're continuing the occupation. The occupation must end. As respects Al Qaida, public enemy number one, they're responsible for about 10 percent of the violence inside Iraq according to the reports. 

I would keep a quick reaction force in Kuwait in case it became necessary, but
that is different, Barack, than keeping troops stationed inside.


 Excuse -- let me finish, please. 


 That is different than keeping troops stationed inside Iraq, because keeping troops stationed inside Iraq -- combat troops -- and continuing combat missions, whether it's against Al Qaida or anyone else, at least from my perspective, is a continuation of the occupation. And I think a continuation of the occupation continues the problem, not just in reality, but in perception that America's occupying the country. 


 Yes, I will. But I have to say, it's not enough to talk about the extraordinary service of men and women who are wearing the uniform and have worn the uniform of the United States of America. Tonight across this country, 200,000 men and women who wore our uniform and served this country patriotically, veterans, will go to sleep under bridges and on grates. We have men and women coming back from Iraq with PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder, other kind of emotional problems; many with serious physical injuries. 


 We have families who are here at home, while they serve in Iraq, who are having a terrible time paying for child care, paying the bills. We have reservists and members of the Guard who go to serve and get paid 50 cents, 60 cents on the dollar for what they were making in their civilian jobs. 

What are we going to do about this? Every man and woman who comes back from
Iraq or Afghanistan deserves to have a thorough comprehensive evaluation of
their medical needs, including mental health needs and physical health needs.
Every one of them ought to get job training if they need it, and additional
education if they need it.

We, America, you know, we should help them find a job. They didn't leave us on
our own, we shouldn't leave them on their own. And we need to narrow this gap
between civilian pay and military pay, and help these families with their
child care.

And then finally, for all the veterans who have served this country, we need a
guaranteed stream of funding for the Veterans Administration so we don't have
veterans waiting six months or a year to get the health care that they
deserve.


 Well, I'm opposed to Yucca Mountain. I will end it for all the reasons that have already been discussed, because of the science that's been discovered, because apparently some forgery of documents that's also been discovered -- all of which has happened in recent years. 


 But I want to go to one other subject on which the three of us differ. And that is the issue of nuclear power. 

I've heard Senator Obama say he's open to the possibility of additional
nuclear power plants. Senator Clinton said at a debate earlier, standing
beside me, that she was agnostic on the subject.

I am not for it or agnostic. I am against building more nuclear power plants,
because I do not think we have a safe way to dispose of the waste. I think
they're dangerous, they're great terrorist targets and they're extraordinarily
expensive.

They are not, in my judgment, the way to green this -- to get us off our
dependence on oil.


 I did respond to it. I said the science that has been revealed since that time and the forged documents that have been revealed since that time have made it very -- this has been for years, Hillary. This didn't start last year or three years ago. I've said this for years now -- have revealed that this thing does not make sense, is not good for the people of Nevada, and it's not good for America. 

Which, by the way, is also why I am opposed to building more nuclear power
plants.


 Well, yes, there are a lot of things that need to be done. 


 If you were to double the number of nuclear power plants on the planet tomorrow -- if that were possible -- it would deal with about one-seventh of the greenhouse gas problem. This is not the answer. 

It goes beyond wind and solar. We ought to be investing in cellulose-based
biofuels. There are a whole range of things that we ought to be investing in
and focusing on.

I want to come back to something Senator Clinton said a minute ago. I agree
with her and Senator Obama that it's very important to break this iron grip
that the gas and oil industry has on our energy policy in this country.

But I believe, Senator Clinton, you've raised more money from those people
than any candidate, Democrat or Republican. I think we have to be able to take
those people on if we're going to actually change our policy.

Now, what we need in my judgment is we need a cap on carbon emissions. That
cap needs to come down every year. We need an 80 percent reduction in our
carbon emissions by the year 2050. Below the cap, we ought to make the
polluters pay.


 That money ought to be invested in all these clean renewable sources of energy: wind, solar, cellulose-based biofuels. As I said earlier, I'm opposed to building more nuclear power plants. 

But I'd go another step that at least I haven't heard these two candidates
talk about. They can answer for themselves. I believe we need a moratorium on
the building of any more coal-fired power plants unless and until we have the
ability to capture and sequester the carbon in the ground.

Because every time we build a new coal-fired power plant in America when we
don't have that technology attached to it, what happens is, we're making a
terrible situation worse. We're already the worst polluter on the planet.
America needs to be leading by example.


 Well, at least from my perspective, what we need to be doing is we need comprehensive immigration reform. We need to create a path for citizenship for 11 million to 14 million who are here who are undocumented We need to give them a real chance to earn -- I'm not for amnesty, but I am for being able to earn American citizenship. 


 I'm about to get to that. 

I think that a couple of the requirements, in order to be able to earn
American citizenship, are, first, if you came here illegally, we can't pretend
it didn't happen. We are a country of laws and we believe in enforcement of
those laws. So we have to show recognition of having violated the law, and
that means payment of a fine.


 Second, I think if you want to become an American citizen and earn American citizenship, you should learn to speak English. 

Now, I think that we should help with that process. We should help make sure
that those who are living here, and they're not English-speaking as their
first language, get a chance to actually learn English.

But I think that should be a requirement for becoming an American citizen.


 Thank you. 

We need universal pre-K. Barack spoke about early childhood education. We need
universal pre-K for every 4-year-old in America. And we ought to go earlier
than that with child care, nutrition needs, health care needs.

We also have a huge dropout rate. We have high schools that are essentially
dropout factories. We have to create second chance schools. We have to create
opportunities of those young people to be -- even though a lot of them do,
he's right, start to drop out from a very young age, we need to get them on
the right track. But once they're in high school, if they drop out, these
second chance schools have been remarkably successful in getting them back
into school.


 I think that's fair, but I haven't changed my position on this. I'm against it. Having grown up where I did in the rural South, everyone around me had guns, everyone hunted. And I think it is enormously important to protect people's Second Amendment rights. 

I don't believe that means you need an AK-47 to hunt. And I think the assault
weapons ban, which Hillary spoke about just a minute ago, as president of the
United States I'll do everything in my power to reinstate it. But I do think
we need a president who understands the sportsmen, hunters who use their guns
for lawful purposes have a right to have their Second Amendment rights looked
after.


 Yes. 


 It was absolutely appropriate, and I didn't actually speak -- place a call to President Musharraf. I placed a call to the Pakistani ambassador in the United States and told him that I knew Musharraf, we had met in Islamabad years ago and talked about some of the problems in Pakistan at that time and that I had some things I wanted to say to him. 

Now, the things I had to say to him were tough. And they were exactly the
things that the president of the Untied States should say to a President
Musharraf under these circumstances.

First, I said to him, you have to continue on the march to democratization in
South Pakistan. Benazir Bhutto, who I was with in Abu Dhabi in the Middle East
just a few years ago, I heard her talk about the path to democratization being
baptized in blood in Pakistan. She put her life at risk for that path to
democratization.

What I said to Musharraf is: You have to stay on that path. Now, he said he
would. That needs to be taken with great cynicism and a huge grain of salt,
given his history.

Second, I said you must allow international investigators in to determine what
happened, because no one is going to trust some internal investigation that
you conduct. Actually, they have now allowed Scotland Yard investigators into
Pakistan to at least conduct some investigation.

And then, third, I said these elections that are scheduled have to take place
as soon as possible, but they need to be real. They have to be open, fair. The
opposition parties need to be represented. They have to be secure.

And those are the points I wanted to make to him. And those are exactly the
points I would make to him as president of the United States.


 It was December, a little over a year ago; made the decision with my family. And the discussion was, what is the cause of our lives -- with my wife, Elizabeth -- and what is it we want to spend our time doing, to serve this country we love so much? 

And the cause of my life is the middle class, low-income families, and having
everybody in America have the kind of chances and opportunity that I've had.

And that is what my campaign is about. It is central to everything I do. And
it is personal to what I'll do as president of the United States.


 No, that's exactly right. Can I start by saying how proud I am to be here tonight, a debate sponsored by the Congressional Black Caucus on Dr. King's holiday?

And particularly on this night, when we're honoring the legacy of Dr. King,
central to his work was the idea of fighting for real equality between the
races, fighting to end poverty in America, his famous Poor People's Campaign,
which he was engaged in at the time of his death, fighting for garbage
workers, actually, in Memphis.

And the chasm between the rich and the poor in America is wide. It is getting
worse. The rich are get richer. And we've added five million people to the
poverty rolls in just over the course of the last seven years, which is...


 Here's what we should do. That's why I'm getting to this. What Bush does is he leaves 50 million -- as Hillary pointed out -- 50 million Americans. They're low-income Americans and moderate-income Americans. They are completely left out of the stimulus package.

If we're actually going to deal with the legacy of Dr. King, if we're going to
deal with this issue of poverty -- and I have a comprehensive plan to do that,
it is the cause of my life, to end poverty in this country -- we also have to
include all Americans in this stimulus plan.

Now, one difference between what I have proposed and what my two colleagues
have proposed is I have done something that not only stimulates the economy,
but creates long-term benefits, investment in green infrastructure, which
creates jobs.

Instead of just getting money out in the short term, this will actually create
jobs over the long term, create green infrastructure.

Yes, we need to do something about the mortgage crisis. I want to mention one
last thing.

There is one other issue that was mentioned in passing by the two of them,
which is the issue of jobs. And there is a difference between myself and my
colleagues on this issue of jobs, because they both supported the Peru trade
deal.

My view is the Peru trade deal was similar to NAFTA. And this is crucial to
the state of South Carolina...


 ... no, no -- and crucial to the state of the South Carolina and jobs in South Carolina. South Carolina has been devastated by NAFTA and trade deals like NAFTA.


 No, no. What I'm saying is if we do what we should do to green the economy, if we change our unemployment insurance laws, modernize them to make them available to more people, to more Americans, if we in fact give help to the states, which gets money straight into the economy and we deal with the mortgage crisis in a serious way with a home rescue fund to provide transitional financing for those people who are about to lose their homes, all those things will stimulate the economy.


 You have to give me a chance to respond to Senator Obama.


 Thank you.

Well, first of all, what I have proposed for green-collar jobs will create
jobs within 30 or so days, so we will have an immediate impact on the economy
and stimulate the economy. Second, no one has to explain to me what these
trade deals have done to South Carolina, to North Carolina. My father, who's
sitting right out there in the audience, worked in the mills for 36 years and
we have seen what these trade deals have done to people who have worked hard
all their lives.


 And the problem with Peru, Barack, is you are leaving the enforcement of environmental and labor regulations in the hands of George Bush.

I wouldn't trust George Bush to enforce anything, certainly not trade
obligations.

(APPLAUSE)


 There's a third person in this debate.


 What I want to say first is, are there three people in this debate, not two?

(APPLAUSE)


 And I also want to know -- I also want to know on behalf of voters here in South Carolina, this kind of squabbling, how many children is this going to get health care? How many people are going to get an education from this? How many kids are going to be able to go to college because of this?


 We have got to understand -- you know, and I respect both of my fellow candidates -- but we have got to understand this is not about us personally. It is about...

(APPLAUSE)

... what we are trying to do for this country and what we believe in.

Now, fiscal responsibility, which I think was the question. It was a little
hard to tell there at the end of that. But I think the question was about
fiscal responsibility.

I have proposed, I think, the most aggressive, most progressive agenda of the
three of us up here. And I was the first to come out with a universal health
care plan, first to come out with a global warming plan, first -- and, to the
best of my knowledge, only at this point -- to come out with a comprehensive,
detailed plan to end poverty in America, since we are on Dr. King's day.

This is the cause of my life. Everything I have proposed, I have come up with
a way to pay for it. And I've been very explicit about how it should be paid
for, not abstract, not rhetoric, very, very explicit.

But I do have to say, in response to something Senator Clinton said just a
minute ago, both Senator Obama and I have said Social Security needs a
solution. And we have said we won't privatize, we won't cut benefits, we won't
raise the retirement age. Same thing that Hillary has said.

But she has proposed nothing about how we're going to create revenue to keep
Social Security alive and talked about fiscal responsibility. Here's the
problem: If you don't have -- this is not complicated. The American people
understand it. If you've got more money going out than is coming in, you're
going to eventually run out of money.

And you've got to have a way to pay for it, which is why -- now, let me finish
this. Lord knows you let them go on forever.

(APPLAUSE)

What I'm saying is we have to be consistent in what we're saying. I have said
I think Hillary doesn't want to talk about raising taxes. Let's just be honest
about that.

Barack and I have both said that you've got to do something about the cap on
Social Security taxes, which is now capped at $97,000. It means if somebody is
making $80,000 a year, every dime of their income is taxed for Social
Security. But if you are making $50 million a year, only the first $97,000 is
taxed.

That's not right. And people ought to be paying their Social Security taxes.
But the American people deserve to know what we're going to do.

We can disagree. There's nothing wrong with that, so they can make an informed
choice, but they at least deserve to know where they stand and what we'd do.


 Yes, is the answer. I think they have targeted - if they haven't been racially motivated, I don't know. There's no way for me to know what's inside their head.

But what they have done is they have targeted the lowest income, most
vulnerable families. And anybody who's paying any attention to what's going on
in America today understands, if you are African-American in this country
today, you are likely to have a net worth of about 10 percent of what white
families have.

This is not an accident. I mean, we can go put our heads against the wall and
pretend that the past never happened, pretend that we didn't live through
decades of slavery, followed by decades of segregation, followed by decades of
discrimination, which is still going on today.

(APPLAUSE)

That history and that legacy has consequences. And the consequence has been
that African-American families are more vulnerable. They're more vulnerable to
payday lenders. They're more vulnerable to predatory lenders, which is why we
desperately need a national law, which I have proposed, which would crack down
on these predatory payday lenders.

It's not enough to do it state-by-state, because these predators just move
from place to place to place.

I was in a neighborhood in Cleveland a few months ago, one-block radius, 38
houses under foreclosure, middle-class, African-American neighborhood. These
people work. They put everything they had into their homes. And they were
about to lose them because these predators have come into the neighborhood and
taken everything they have.

So here are the solutions. Number one, we need a national predatory lending
law. Number two, we've got to help low-income families save.


 They have nothing to fall back on. Many have no bank account. They don't deal with financial institutions. We need to teach financial literacy, we need to match what they're able to save so that they actually have something that they can fall back on in case they get in a place where they need more money.

(APPLAUSE)


 You voted against it because the limit was too high, is that what you just said?


 So there's no limit at all.


 She's been wanting to ask it, too.

Can I just ask, though, before I do -- I mean, I hear the back and forth on
this one particular vote, but it is -- I do think it's important, and I
mentioned this about Senator Clinton earlier, to be fair, about Social
Security. I do think it's important whether you are willing to take hard
positions.

I mean, the members of the Congressional Black Caucus who are sitting in front
of me right know they have to go to the floor of the House every day and vote
on hard issues. And they have to vote up or down or not show up to vote -- one
of those three choices. What I didn't hear was an explanation for why over 100
times you voted present instead of yes or no when you had a choice to vote up
or down.

(APPLAUSE)


 I don't question whether you worked on tough stuff.


 I don't question whether you worked on tough stuff.


 The question is, why would you over 100 times vote present? I mean, every one of us -- every one -- you've criticized Hillary. You've criticized me for our votes.


 We've cast hundreds and hundreds of votes. What you're criticizing her for, by the way, you've done to us, which is you pick this vote and that vote out of the hundreds that we've cast.

(APPLAUSE)


 And what -- all I'm saying is, what's fair is fair. You have every right to defend any vote. You do.


 And I respect your right to do that on any -- on any substantive issue. It does not make sense to me -- and what if I had just not shown up...


 Wait, wait, wait. Wait, let me finish.


 What if I had just not shown up to vote on things that really mattered to this country? It would have been safe for me politically. It would have been the careful and cautious thing to do, but I have a responsibility to take a position...


 ... even when it has political consequences for me.

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, it's a good question. I think, honestly, none of our three plans cover them.

But what I have done is strengthen...

(APPLAUSE)

... strengthen the safety net of the public health system so that our public
health clinics, our public hospitals will always be available.

And if that is married to comprehensive immigration reform, so that people who
are living here undocumented actually have a chance to become American
citizens, then I think they've got the opportunity to become part of the plan.

There are a couple things I want to say, though. Senator Obama spoke -- and
he's right about this -- about the importance of us being straightforward and
being honest during the campaign.

The truth is that there are three health care plans represented on this stage.
Two are universal; one is not. His is not. Senator Clinton's is, and mine is.


 In order for the plan to be universal, it has to mandate coverage for everybody. And when we talk about getting it done -- and Barack just spoke, as he does often, eloquently, about taking on the drug companies, the insurance companies, I also think it's important to recognize that Senator Obama has taken more money from the drug companies than anybody. Senator Clinton has taken more money from the insurance companies than anybody.

I have not. And I am ready to take these people on.


 That's fair.


 But we would cover them. We cover them, Barack.


 Yes, we do.


 Yes, we do. It's not true, Barack.

(CROSSTALK)


 No, no. Here's the problem. The problem with this argument is you can make exactly the same argument about Social Security.

I mean, you think about the analogy. What George Bush says is he wants people
to be able to get out of the Social Security system, choose, elect to get out
of the Social Security system. Well, that's exactly what this argument is.


 This argument is you shouldn't have to have health care. If you choose not to have health care, you shouldn't have to have it.

And that is a threshold question. It is a judgment. It's a fair policy debate.

(CROSSTALK)


 There's nothing wrong with us arguing about this, but I believe that there is not a single man, woman, and child in America who's not worthy of health care. Everybody should get health care.

(APPLAUSE)


 But, Barack, you're ignoring that we subsidize...


 OK, all right, go ahead.


 He's wrong because George Bush himself said the entire reason for the surge was to create an environment for political progress. Everyone from the Iraq Study Group, to even Bush recognized -- and if Bush recognizes it, man, it's really got to be out there.

(LAUGHTER)


 Even President Bush recognizes that unless the Sunni and Shia reach some political reconciliation, there cannot be stability in Iraq. And the problem with this definition and evaluation of where the progress has been made is that there has been no meaningful political progress.

There has been a little bit, in fairness. A little bit, but very little. And I
don't think it changes anything.

The one thing I would say is -- and I would actually like for both of them to
have a chance to respond to is this -- what I have said very clearly, all of
us has said, we would end the war. And I don't have any doubt that all of us
are committed to that, I don't doubt that. But how aggressively and how
quickly is an important question.

And I have said in the first year that I am president, I will have all combat
troops out of Iraq. All combat missions will end in Iraq, and there will be no
permanent military bases in Iraq.

(APPLAUSE)


 I have not heard -- now, admittedly, just to be fair, I don't hear everything they say on the campaign trail, but I have not heard either of them say that definitively. So I would be interested in knowing whether they will commit to having all combat troops out and ending combat missions in the first year.


 Would you mind saying that...


 Say that a little more often.


 And women and African-Americans.


 Well, first of all, I don't think it's for me to tell anybody, and particularly not African Americans, what they should consider when they're voting. I think they ought to be able to consider anything that they think is fair and reasonable and important to them.

What I would say, though, is on the issue, since we are here on Dr. King's
day, on the issues of equality, ending poverty in America, the things that he
devoted so much of his life to, no one has been -- and with all respect to the
two other candidates, no one has been more aggressive on these issues than I
have.

I mean, ending poverty is the cause, the single most important cause in my
life. I'm not suggesting for a minute the two of them haven't spoken about it,
because they obviously have. But I have made it central to what I'm doing,
central to my campaign and I have been trying to drive it in this campaign and
welcome everything they have to say.

I have a comprehensive set of ideas about how we end poverty in this country.
I think it is a huge moral issue facing the United States of America, and it
is an enormous issue facing the African American community.

If you're black, you're much more likely to be poor, you're much less likely
to have health care coverage. That community is hurt worse by poverty than any
community in America. And it's our responsibility, not just for the African
American community, but for America, as a nation, to take on this moral
challenge, to try as best we can to walk in the shadow of Dr. King and try to
make certain that we take this cause on, and I intend to do it.

It will be central to the work that I do as president of the United States,
ending poverty in America.


 Maybe I can read it when I can't go to sleep at night.


 Well, first of all, before I ever was involved in politics at all, I was involved with Urban Ministries in North Carolina, which is a group that takes care of the poorest of the poor, the homeless, the people who are struggling.

There are a lot of Americans -- I've bet some people here won't know this --
but I've been in a fight with Bill O'Reilly -- that's a fight I'd love to be
in, by the way -- I've been in a fight with Bill O'Reilly about whether we, in
fact, have 200,000 men and women who wore our uniform who are homeless every
single night.

They are. There's absolutely no question about that. And anybody in this
audience who's paying attention knows it.

But what I worry about is all the work that I've done at the poverty center
that I started at the university, the work I did before I got involved in
politics, all the substantive ideas, what I worry about is this starts to
sound like a statistic.

You know, we talk about 37 million Americans who live in poverty -- that's
more than the population of California -- in the richest nation on the planet.

I've been to hundreds of places around this country who take care of the
poorest of the poor, extraordinary, wonderful places. But I'll never forget,
just a year or so ago, I was with a woman in Kansas City who told me the story
-- worked full-time, worked full-time. She had several children.

Every night in the winter, she could not pay both her heating bill and her
rent. She had to choose. Single mom, working full-time, she had to put her
kids in all of their winter clothing, in their coats, bundle them up in the
bed together, put as many blankets on top of them as she could.

And she'd get them out of bed in the morning and send them off to school. And
the last thing she would say to them? "Please, for goodness's sakes, don't
tell anybody at school what's happening here, because they'll come and take
you away from me."


 No mother in America should have to live like that. We are a better country than that.

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, I appreciate what both of them said about the transformative effect of having lived with this. I mean, I grew up, I was born here in South Carolina, grew up in South Carolina, Georgia and North Carolina, and, in my early years, I lived in the segregated south.

I mean, I saw up close the impact it had on people's lives and I saw up close
the blood, sweat and tears and lives of those, including some people who are
in this audience tonight, what they went through to bring about this change.

And there is a great deal -- Hillary says the Republicans don't talk about it.
There's some things we don't talk about, either, and if you look at what's...

(APPLAUSE)

... if you look at what's happening, my father, who, I mentioned earlier, is
sitting in the audience, he raised me to believe that the men and women who
worked in the mill with him were worth every bit as much as the man that owned
that mill.

(APPLAUSE)

And if we really believe that every American is of equal value, no matter who
their family is, where the live or what the color of their skin -- when are we
going to start living together? Because you look at what's happening -- I
announced my campaign from the ninth ward of New Orleans.

I think a lot of America was shocked to see those pictures coming out of the
ninth ward. And you can't pick on New Orleans. The same thing's true in many
communities all over this country.

I mean, we have got to -- both in housing policy and economic policy and every
other way -- create the kind of opportunity for people to be able to move. It
shouldn't just be that rich folks are able to, if they don't like their
neighborhood or don't like their school or are worried about crime in their
neighborhood, they're the only ones that can go somewhere else.

Everybody in America ought to have that chance, at the same time that we're
investing in a serious way to improving all of our neighborhoods.


 I would just add on it's just really important for primary voters in South Carolina and all the other subsequent primaries to understand they're not just voting in a primary. They're voting to establish what we're going to be doing next November and who our candidate will be next November. And it's becoming increasingly likely, I think, that John McCain is going to be the Republican candidate. 

Now, here's what we have to be thinking about. Who will be tough enough and
strong enough? And who can compete against John McCain in every place in
America?

You know, I believe that I won't just be here campaigning in the South
Carolina primary. When I'm the Democratic nominee, I'll be back in South
Carolina campaigning for the general election.

And we can't concede places like South Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia,
Missouri, all these places around America where we know, everyone knows, that
we always do well -- all three of us have been through this -- we always do
well in Chicago, or New York, or Los Angeles, Seattle.

We do well in the big urban areas. The question is: Are we competitive in the
rural areas, in the tougher places for Democrats to compete?

And the only thing I would say -- and I think it has nothing to do with race
and gender. Let me be really clear about that. It's amazing now that being the
white male...


 ... is different.

What I was going to say, though, is being able to go everywhere in America and
campaign and to compete -- and I grew up in the rural south, in small towns
all across the rural south, and I think I can go everywhere and compete head-
to-head with John McCain.

And, actually, the last time I saw one of your polls that had all three of us
against John McCain, I was the one that beat John McCain everywhere in
America.

(APPLAUSE)

And I think we need to be able to have a candidate when people are voting --
it's not the only consideration. Lord knows, if you don't agree with what we
stand for, and you don't believe in us, our character and our ability to lead
this country, you should not vote for us, no matter what it means for the
general election.

But if you believe in our passion, our strength, our toughness, our
independence from these special interests -- I've never taken money from a
Washington lobbyist or a special interest PAC, which is different than these
two guys, over our whole career.

But what I would say that I think what that means is I can go anywhere in
America and compete against John McCain and win.


 I just want to add that I think it's about -- I don't think it's about polls either, Hillary, by the way. But I do think it is about fundamental differences between us and them. And this is a difference that you and I have. You know, I think that John McCain has made central to his time in public life, in his campaign, campaign finance reform and cleaning up the money in politics. And I think it's dangerous for us to send somebody against him who presents a contrast to what he represents. And I'm proud of the fact that I've never taken money from a Washington lobbyist or a special interest PAC. 


 And I have a question -- I have a question that I'm interested in hearing you respond to. You've talked a lot about day one. I've committed -- I don't know what Barack has said about this -- but I've committed not to have any corporate lobbyists working in my White House on the first day that I'm president. Will you make the same commitment? 


 Is that a no? 


 Those people, though -- here's the problem, Hillary. Everybody is listening. They can make their own judgment about this. They don't have to depend on us. When somebody gives you millions and millions of dollars, I think they expect something. I don't think they're doing it for nothing. 


 And what they expect from me is they expect me to stand up for democracy, for the right to jury trial, for the right for little people to be heard in the courtroom. And that is exactly what I stand up for. That is not the same thing. That is not the same thing as corporate lobbyists who are in there every single day lobbying against the interests of middle-class Americans. And I think we need a president who can stand up. We have a difference about this. You're entitled to your view. But we have a real difference about it. 


 And it requires that -- wait, wait. Both of them talked about it. You've got to let me say a word. 


 What it requires is having something beyond a short- term foreign policy of convenience. I mean, Bush has done extraordinary damage to us. 


 But if we have a visionary foreign policy, where we re- establish America as a moral leader in the world, where we do the things that we need to do to combat global poverty, to deal with the spread of HIV/AIDS, the spread of disease at large, economic development, what it does is it takes an entire generation of young people who are sitting on the fence as I speak and on one side is Al Qaida and Bin Laden, Islamic jihad, and on the other side is the United States of America, which way do they go? That depends entirely on us. If they continue to see this foreign policy of belligerence, selfishness, only interested in the expansion of American power, we will drive them in the other direction. If, on the other hand, they see America as the light, the source of hope and opportunity, it will pull them to us like a magnet. We need to be that light again. (APPLAUSE) 


 For two reasons. One is that -- we've talked about this a great deal already -- I met with Martin III in Atlanta on Saturday and he was very kind about me pushing the single biggest issue -- two biggest issues that Dr. King stood for, which are the issues of equality and ending poverty in America. I've been on at least part of his poor people's campaign. I was in Marks, Mississippi, among other places. I mean, I have been pushing this issue as aggressively and as loudly as I possibly can and I will do it as long as I'm alive, because it is central to what I believe. He also worked very hard for the Voting Rights Act and he would look at an America today where almost half of our people don't vote. They're disenchanted. They -- Barack's spoken about this. They feel disengaged. And what we need is a president of the United States who actually believes to their core in equality, who's willing to fight for that equality, who's willing to do things that may not be politically popular. And fighting to end poverty in America may not get you any votes, but it is the right thing to do. (APPLAUSE) 


