 Certainly there's a middle ground, George. And the middle ground is that we win this war and we do it with honor. We don't just stay indefinitely. We put some pressure—just like we have been the last week, with Secretary Rice and Secretary Gates—on the Saudis. 


 Look, we've made them rich. Every time somebody in this room goes to the gas pump, you've helped make the Saudi royal family a little wealthier. And the money that has been used against us in terrorism has largely come from the Middle East. 

There's two things we've got to do.

Number one, we've got to insist that the people in that neighborhood take a
far greater role militarily and financially in solving the problem. It's their
neighborhood.

But the second thing we'd do, for our own national security, is end our
dependence on foreign oil. And let's not play around and say "30 years," let's
get it done. Let's get it done now. And let's make sure that we don't have to
depend upon their oil for our future energy needs.


 If we can feed ourselves, if we can fuel ourselves, if we can manufacture the weapons to fight for ourselves, we're a free people. If we can't do those three things, we're not free. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I think I'd like to side with the people of America who really are looking for a lot better action than they're getting out of their president or Congress. You know, if you want to know how to fix it, I've got a solution. Either give every American the same kind of health care that Congress has, or make Congress have the same kind of health care that every American has. 

(APPLAUSE) They'll get it fixed. And the issue in this country is that we
really have an incredible problem because our system is upside-down. It
focuses on intervention at the catastrophic level of disease rather than
really focusing on prevention. So we've got a system that, no matter how much
money we pour into it, we're not going to fix it.


 We're not going to fix it until we begin to address the fact that this country has put its focus not on wellness, not on prevention, not on health, but on sickness. And that's the single most important and urgent thing that has to be done. And if we don't do that, then we're going to continue just pouring money—and it's almost like having a boat that's taking on water, and rather than plugging the hole, we want to get a bigger bucket to take the water out of the boat. 


 The problem with it, it actually would bring cuts to the Medicare alternative, which is the worst thing we could do, because it then takes money away from seniors. 


 So, again, it's just not a good solution... 

(CROSSTALK)


 Well, the problem is, George, sometimes when you get what you want, you don't want what you get. And this is a great case of that happening. I don't think it's the job of the United States to export our form of government. It's the job of the United States to protect our citizens, to secure our own borders, which we have failed to do for over 20 years. It's the job of our government to make us free and us safe, and to create an enviable kind of government and system that everybody else will want, much in the same way I think we ended up seeing the fall of the Soviet Union. And as far as how do we get there... 


 Absolutely not, because I don't think we can force people to accept our way of life, our way of government. What we can to is to create the strongest America: change our tax system, make it so that people are healthier, create the enviable education system on this planet, make sure that jobs come back to this country rather than disappear from this country. 


 And if we do that kind of approach, we'll have the sort of freedom internally, secure borders, a safer nation. That makes a whole lot more sense to me than spending billions and billions and billion of dollars to try to prop up some government we don't even like when we get it. And people in this country are losing their jobs, losing their health insurance, and their kids are sitting with their heads on their desks, sound asleep in school. 

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, I think the obvious answer is, it's not necessarily that we raise a tax to fix what we ought to fix of this country. We're spending billions of dollars all over our country and around the world, but it may be time that we start spending some of those billions of dollars to deal with our own infrastructure. And the bridge isn't the only problem. Anybody who's flown lately—as I do pretty regularly in the commercial system—know that we have a complete gridlock. 


 And part of that problem is we've got a system of air traffic control that was designed in 1950, five years before I was born. We've got better navigation systems in our rental cars than we have running the airline industry today. And so, yes, we need to address it. It's not being talked about. And it's our bridges, our interstates, our sewer and water treatment systems. They're crumbling. They're old. We saw an 85-year-old steam pipe explode in the middle of Manhattan recently. And we have to start addressing building this country, not everybody else's. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I absolutely support the fair tax. And part of the reason is, the current system is one that penalizes productivity. A recent poll showed that more Americans fear an audit of the IRS than they do getting mugged. And the reason is, getting mugged isn't as painless as an audit from the IRS. 

(LAUGHTER) And the reality is, if we could have the fair tax, you take $10
trillion parked offshore, bring it home, you rebuild the "made in America"
brand, you free up people to earn money, to work, you don't penalize them for
taking a second job, you don't penalize them for investing, you don't penalize
them for savings. Today, our tax system doesn't need a tap of the hammer, a
twist of the screwdriver, it needs a complete overhaul. And what the fair tax
does, it ends the underground economy. No more illegals...


 Let me, if I may. No more illegals, no more gamblers, prostitutes, pimps and dope dealers will be able to escape the tax code. 


 It's the single great thing that will help this country (inaudible) revitalized economy. 

(APPLAUSE)


 No, it's actually better than that, Mitt, it's even better than that. 

(APPLAUSE)


 They didn't look at that... 

(CROSSTALK)


 I think probably the greatest mistake I made was not taking good care of my own personal health for the first half of my life. And that's been one of the most transformational things I've done, and I just wish I'd started much earlier. 


 I would put the very same frame on my wall in the White House I did as governor for 10 and a half years. It's a frame that has a photo, and underneath the photo it says, "Our boss." My picture was never in that frame in 10 and a half years. Every week or so, we'd put the picture of some ordinary Arkansas citizen. And I told our staff, let's never forget who the real boss is. I hope every day I'd never forget I work for those people; they don't work for me. I'd like to be the kind of president that's more concerned about the people on Main Street, not just the folks on Wall Street. And we need that kind of Republican running, that kind of Republican winning. 

I'd never forget who the boss really, really is.

(APPLAUSE)


 Let me begin by saying, for the first time in about nine debates, I'm kind of glad I wasn't in on the first few minutes because it was all about these guys fighting each other. 

(LAUGHTER)

And I am more than content to let you let them fight all they want tonight,
shed each other's blood and then I'll be ready to run for president because...

(LAUGHTER)

... I'm not interested in fighting these guys.

(APPLAUSE)

What I'm interested in is fighting for the American people, and I think
they're looking for a presidential candidate who's not so interested in a
demolition derby against the other people in his own party.


 There are some real issues out there in this country we need to be fighting for on behalf of the people. Now, one of them, quite frankly, I do believe, is the sanctity of human life... 

(APPLAUSE)

... because I do believe that it is one of the defining issues of our culture
and civilization in that it expresses our understanding that every single
human being in this society has intrinsic value and worth.

When our founding fathers put their signatures on the Declaration of
Independence, those 56 brave people, most of whom, by the way, were clergymen,
they said that we have certain inalienable rights given to us by our creator,
and among these life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, life being one of
them. I still believe that.

(APPLAUSE)


 First of all, we don't have a health care system. We have a health care maze. And we don't have a health care crisis. We have a health crisis. Eighty percent of the $2 trillion we spend on health care in this country is spent on chronic disease. If we don't change the health of this nation by focusing on prevention, we're never going to catch up with the costs no matter what plan we have. 

(APPLAUSE)


 The reality is it's a health crisis, and I would further say that one of the challenges we face is that a lot of the Democrats want to turn it over to the government, while the Republicans want to turn it over completely to the private insurance companies. 

I think the better idea is to turn it over to each individual consumer and let
him or her make that choice. I trust me a lot more than I trust government or
a lot more than I trust the insurance companies.

And we've got a situation with 10,000 baby boomers a day signing up for Social
Security, going into the Medicare system. And I just want to remind everybody
when all the old hippies find out that they get free drugs, just wait until
what that's going to cost out there.

(LAUGHTER) (APPLAUSE)


 I think it was a mistake. We need to be making sure that the Republican Party is the most inclusive party for the simple reason that our message touches more Americans and helps more people from the bottom get to the next rung on the ladder than anybody. 

(APPLAUSE)

You know, it's interesting, the most, I guess, wonderful reaction we've had in
this entire room is when Hillary's name is mentioned. It gets louder than an
Aerosmith concert.

(LAUGHTER)

But I want to say this -- you've asked: What's the difference? No matter which
one of us is on this stage -- and, look, I like to be funny, let me be real
honest with you. There's nothing funny about Hillary Clinton being president.
Let me tell you why.

(APPLAUSE)

If she's president, taxes go up, health care becomes the domain of the
government, spending goes out of control, our military loses its morale, and
I'm not sure we'll have the courage and the will and the resolve to fight the
greatest threat this country's ever faced in Islamofascism.

(APPLAUSE)

We've got an enemy that wants to kill every last one of us. We cannot be soft.
We must be strong.

We'll sign crazy bills like the Law of the Sea Treaty and give away our
sovereignty.

And that's why, with all of the fun we're going to have talking about it,
there's nothing funny about Hillary being president.

(APPLAUSE)


 The president had the right idea, but he used the wrong word. When he used the word privatization, it scared the daylights out of a lot of people because it was right in the middle... 


 Well, but it scared the daylights out of people because they're thinking Enron and WorldCom, and that that's where their money would go. The right word is personalization. Empower individuals to have a greater say over their money. 

And that's what it is. Keep the government from robbing the trust funds, which
is something that, if it was done in the private sector, would get a guy in
jail.

(APPLAUSE)

And that's been going on. And then another thing is to come up with some
creative solutions. You asked: Are we willing to be bold?

Yes. We have to be bold. It's a big problem. It needs a big solution. One
thing, when people reach retirement age, if they really have enough retirement
benefits, they don't need Social Security for the long term, give them the
option of one-time buyout, or the opportunity to purchase an annuity, with
their funds, tax-free, that frees up the long-term obligation of the
government.

Because the problem is the actuarial tables were designed so that people would
retire at 65 and die at 67.

(LAUGHTER)

Well, I'm sorry, but folks aren't dying that early. And short of taking them
out, which is not a good idea...

(LAUGHTER)

... we're going to have to make the benefits work better. And that's one way
to get it done.

(APPLAUSE)


 When, four days ago, the parliament of Turkey indicated that they would amass those troops, it's a clear signal -- not just saber-rattling, they're serious about defending themselves. 

It would seem to me that we should dispatch the secretary of state immediately
to do two things. First of all, we need to train and equip the Kurds to fight
the terrorists in their midst.

The PKK is a terrorist organization. Those 3,500 terrorists can best be dealt
with by trained and armed Kurds. We don't have to put our military in harm's
way. The Kurds have the capacity to do it against those in the PKK -- but also
to try to get Turkey to realize that there's nothing to be gained by crossing
into that border and creating yet another hostile situation. None of us need
it. None of us want it.

And I would hope that maybe the base in Irbil that was shut down earlier could
become the base in which those operations could be staged.

(APPLAUSE)


 Thank you very much.

Ashley, first of all, let me just express that you're a little misinformed. We
never passed a bill that gave special privileges to the children of illegals
to go to college.

Now, let me tell you what I did do. I supported the bill that would've allowed
those children who had been in our schools their entire school life the
opportunity to have the same scholarship that their peers had, who had also
gone to high school with them and sat in the same classrooms.

They couldn't just move in in their senior year and go to college. It wasn't
about out of state tuition. It was an academic, meritorious scholarship called
the Academic Challenge Scholarship.

Now, let me tell you a couple of provisions of it. And, by the way, it didn't
pass. It passed the House but got in the Senate and got caught up in the same
kind of controversy that this country is caught up in.

And here's what happened. This bill would've said that if you came here, not
because you made the choice but because your parents did, that we're not going
to punish a child because the parent committed a crime.

That's not what we typically do in this country.

It said that if you'd sat in our schools from the time you're five or six-
years old and you had become an A-plus student, you'd completed the core
curriculum, you were an exceptional student, and you also had to be drug and
alcohol-free -- and the other provision, you had to be applying for
citizenship.

It accomplished two things that we knew we wanted to do, and that is, number
one, bring people from illegal status to legal status.

And the second thing, we wanted people to be taxpayers, not tax- takers. And
that's what that provision did.

And finally, would we give that provision to the children of veterans,
personally? What we've done with not just the children of veterans, but most
importantly, veterans is disgraceful in this country.

And that's why I proposed a veterans bill of rights that, if anything, would
give our veterans the most exceptional privileges of all, because they are the
ones who have earned all of our freedom -- every single one of them.


 Well, but they didn't get something better. They had to earn it.

And, you know something, I worked my way through college. I started work when
I was 14 and I had to pay my own way through.

I know how hard it was to get that degree. I am standing here tonight on this
stage because I got an education. If I hadn't had the education, I wouldn't be
standing on this stage. I might be picking lettuce. I might be a person who
needed government support, rather than who was giving so much money in taxes I
want to get rid of the tax code that we've got and make it really different.


 Mitt, let me finish. Let me finish, Mitt.

In all due respect, we are a better country than to punish children for what
their parents did. We're a better country than that.

(Applause)


 No, there is ...


 Well, but let's just be factual.


 Anderson, the first thing that I would get rid of would be the Internal Revenue Service.

(Applause)

We'd have a complete -- getting rid of a $10-billion-a-year industry.

I'm not being facetious. If we enacted the fair tax, one of the most
researched ways to revive our economic future ...

(Applause)

... we will get rid of the IRS. Secondly, I agree we need to revamp homeland
security. It's a mess, and we have a real problem with the way that it's
currently structured. And the third...


 What's that?


 Oh, OK. Get rid of the IRS, and that would account for most of the problems. Most people in this country are more afraid of an audit than they are of a mugging, and there's a reason why.


 I would, Anderson. In fact, I signed a pledge to that effect and would keep that pledge.


 Others have suggested a surcharge on the income tax. That's acceptable. I'm fine with that. Others have suggested, perhaps, a sales tax. That's fine.

(End videotape)


 Well, I was governor nearly 11 years, and in that time I cut 90 taxes. Over that period of time, the income tax remained exactly what it was. The sales tax is one penny higher.

But I did do a number of tax cuts that helped a lot of people all over the
place, like eliminating the marriage penalty, doubling the child care tax
credit, getting rid of capital gains on the sale of a home, cutting capital
gains on other things.

I have a great record on fiscal conservativism. But one thing I've learned,
you know, when you get attacked, it's not always bad. It's like my old pastor
used to tell me, when they're kicking you in the rear, it's just proving
you're still out front.

(Applause)


 You know, one of the toughest challenges that I ever faced as a governor was carrying out the death penalty. I did it more than any other governor ever had to do it in my state. As I look on this stage, I'm pretty sure that I'm the only person on this stage that's ever had to actually do it.

Let me tell you, it was the toughest decision I ever made as a human-being. I
read every page of every document of every case that ever came before me,
because it was the one decision that came to my desk that, once I made it, was
irrevocable.

Every other decision, somebody else could go back and overturn, could fix if
it was a mistake. That was one that was irrevocable.

I believe there is a place for a death penalty. Some crimes are so heinous, so
horrible that the only response that we, as a civilized nation, have for a
most uncivil action is not only to try to deter that person from ever
committing that crime again, but also as a warning to others that some crimes
truly are beyond any other capacity for us to fix.

(Applause)

Now, having said that, there are those who say, "How can you be pro-life and
believe in the death penalty?"

Because there's a real difference between the process of adjudication, where a
person is deemed guilty after a thorough judicial process and is put to death
by all of us, as citizens, under a law, as opposed to an individual making a
decision to terminate a life that has never been deemed guilty because the
life never was given a chance to even exist.


 That's the fundamental difference.

(Applause)


 Jesus was too smart to ever run for public office, Anderson. That's what Jesus would do.

(Applause)


 Do I need to help you out, Mayor, on this one?

(Laughter)

(Applause)


 I'm trying to help you out.


 Sure. I believe the Bible is exactly what it is. It's the word of revelation to us from God himself.

(Applause)

And the fact is that when people ask do we believe all of it, you either
believe it or you don't believe it. But in the greater sense, I think what the
question tried to make us feel like was that, well, if you believe the part
that says "Go and pluck out your eye," well, none of us believe that we ought
to go pluck out our eye. That obviously is allegorical.

But the Bible has some messages that nobody really can confuse and really not
left up to interpretation. "Love your neighbor as yourself."

And as much as you've done it to the least of these brethren, you've done it
unto me. Until we get those simple, real easy things right, I'm not sure we
ought to spend a whole lot of time fighting over the other parts that are a
little bit complicated.

And as the only person here on the stage with a theology degree, there are
parts of it I don't fully comprehend and understand, because the Bible is a
revelation of an infinite god, and no finite person is ever going to fully
understand it. If they do, their god is too small.


 Faith doesn't just influence me. It really defines me. I don't have to wake up every day wondering what do I need to believe?

Let us never sacrifice our principles for anybody's politics. Not now, not
ever.

I believe life begins at conception.

We believe in some things. We stand by those things. We live or die by those
things.

I'm Mike Huckabee, and I approve this message.

(End video clip)


 The Uniform Code of Military Justice is probably the best rule, and it has to do with conduct. People have a right to have whatever feelings, whatever attitudes they wish, but when their conduct could put at risk the morale, or put at risk even the cohesion that Duncan Hunter spoke of, I think that's what is at issue. And that's why our policy is what it is.


 You know, in my position in this entire election, I need the support of anybody and everybody I can get.

(Applause)

(Crosstalk)


 Sure, they should. I disagree with them, strongly disagree with them on the idea of same-sex marriage, but in a democracy we can have disagreements over some policies and still agree on the greater things that make us Republicans.

So would I accept their support? Of course. Would I change my position on
same-sex marriage? No, I wouldn't. But if they're willing to support me, I'll
be their president. I'll be anybody's president, but I'll be true to my
convictions, and I think that's what Americans look for -- not someone they're
going to agree with on everything, but somebody who at least has some
convictions, sticks with them, can explain them, and can at least have respect
for people who have different ones.

(Applause)


 Whether we ought to go to Mars is not a decision that I would want to make, but I would certainly want to make sure that we expand the space program, because every one of us who are sitting here tonight have our lives dramatically improved because there was a space program -- whether it's these screens that we see or the incredible electronics that we use, including the GPS systems that got many of you to this arena tonight.

(Laughter)

Some of you were late because you didn't have one, by the way. Or whether it's
the medical technologies that saved many of our lives or the lives or our
families, it's the direct result of the space program, and we need to put more
money into science and technology and exploration.

Now, whether we need to send somebody to Mars, I don't know. But I'll tell you
what: If we do, I've got a few suggestions, and maybe Hillary could be on the
first rocket to Mars.

(Laughter)


 Well, according to your network's exit polls, some 48 percent of the African-Americans in my state did, in fact, vote for me, which is unusually high for African-Americans voting for a Republican. Here's the reason why: because I asked for their vote, and I didn't wait until October of the election year to do it.

And, while I was governor, I tried to make sure that we included people not
only in appointments and employment, but also in the programs that would truly
make a difference, like putting disproportionate amounts of help for health
problems specifically targeted to African-Americans like hypertension and AIDS
and diabetes. So there's a reason. And I just want to express that our party
had better reach out not just to African-Americans, but to Hispanics and to
all people of this country.

I don't want to be a part of a Republican party that is a tiny, minute and
ever decreasing party, but one that touches every American from top to bottom,
regardless of race.


 It's most certainly a national security threat because a country can only be free if it can do three things. First it has to be able to feed itself. It has to be able to put food on the table for its own citizens. Secondly, it's got to be able to fuel itself. If it looks to somebody else for its energy needs, it's only as free as those who are willing for it to be. It also has to be able to fight for itself. It's got to be able to manufacture its own weapons for defense. Tanks, airplanes, bullets, and bombs. When we start outsourcing everything and we're in that kind of a trade deficit, just remember who feeds us, fuels us and who helps us to fight. That's to whom we're enslaved. If we didn't do those three things, our national security is very much at risk.


 Sometimes it's not so much doing things so that people sacrifice. It's doing them differently. Let me give an example. A lot of the federal budget goes to health care. We need to do what most American companies are finding works in reducing health care cost. That's moving from the intervention-based health care model to a prevention-based. Our current model is upside down. We wait until people are catastrophically ill, and then we spend the most expensive ways of trying to cure incurable diseases. If we would put the focus on prevention, we would find, like American business is finding, that there really is savings if you kill the snake rather than treat the snakebites, which is the way our current system is built.


 Over 80% of the American people know that the tax code is irreparably broken. I would lead one to a fair tax, and that means the rich people aren't going to be made poor, but maybe the poor people could be made rich. That ought to be the goal of any tax system, not to punish somebody but to enable somebody so that they can have a part of the American dream. The fair tax does just that.


 Well, job migration is a result of three things. When you have excessive taxation that penalizes the productivity of a company, you add to that excessive regulation, which means you've got more red tape than is possible to get through. And I would say that as President one of my goals would be, I can't part the Red Sea, but I believe I can part the red tape. The third thing is we've got too much litigation. When a company goes into business, particularly small business, from which 80 percent of all American jobs come, most small business people can't fight off the potential liabilities that come from all of the lawsuits in litigation. Take care of those three things, we won't see the incredible level of job migration that we see today.


 I don't think that's what's necessary. And the reason this issue ought to be important is that we don't own this Earth. We are simply stewards of it, caretakers. And I know on a day like today it's hard to believe there is global warming, if anybody's been in Iowa on a day like today. But climate change and who's causing it is of less importance than what Senator McCain said, and he's exactly right. We have done no harm if we take better care of this planet and give it to your children with cleaner air, cleaner soil and cleaner water.


 I am willing for us to make the decisions which will not necessarily create the mandates. Let me tell you how we do it. You know who one of the biggest energy users is in the whole country? The United States government. If the government commits to being the primary user of alternative forms of energy, we have a market built in and, therefore, the big argument against having alternative energy is there's no market for i8t. Well, let the government be a marketplace, and we'll create the kind of demand that lowers the price rather than raises the price.


 I think people in this country are looking for leadership. They're looking for change. They're not looking that people would be elected to be so much a ruling class but a servant class. We've forgotten that. Our founding fathers had a brilliant, really revolutionary idea, that the people elected would not represent the elite but would represent the ordinary. Our founding fathers had the idea that when we are elected, we're not elected as a part to be elevated up but to truly remember who it is we work for. I think sometimes that's what's happened in America. We forget our job is to keep this country safe first and foremost, and to it's to try to encourage Americans to be their best at everything they do. I can tell you it's a long way from the little rent house I grew up in to this stage. I'm still in awe this country would afford kids like me the opportunity to be a President. I'll try not to forget where I come from and where this country needs to go.


 First of all, the whole role of education is a state issue. It's not really a federal issue. And the worst thing we can do is shift more burden, more responsibility, more authority to the federal government, when more of it needs to go to the states. But I think the federal government can play a pivotal role primarily in helping to make sure that the best practices that are working in the states are shared with state who are struggling. Let me give you a couple of examples of what has to happen in all the states, and the federal government can at least share the data and information. One, personalize the learning for the student. We have 6,000 kids every day drop out in this country. They don't drop out because they're dumb, they drop out because they're bored to death. They're in a 19th century education system in a 21st century world. If we really are serious, first of all, we make sure we build the curriculum around their interests rather than push them into something they don't care about. Second thing, unleash weapons of mass instruction. I'm a passionate, ardent supporter of having music and art in every school for every student at every grade level –


 Because let's just make sure you understand why. It's not frivolous. It's because if we don't develop the right side of the brain with the same level of attention as we do the left, which is the logical side, we end up with an unbalanced, bored student, which is exactly what we've done, and students are out of our system because of it.


 Well, I made very clear to the Congressman that what I suggested was that the federal government becomes the clearinghouse. It shows the best ideas. I was a governor ten-and-a-half years. I had executive experience longer than anyone on this stage running a government. And I had also the most, I think, impressive education record. And you know what? I looked for what other states were doing that worked. I was looking for all the ideas. We raised standards. We measured. And we held people accountable for the results. Anytime you give governors the opportunity to know what will work, they'll use it because it means jobs, it means economic development. That's exactly the only role. If anyone doubts the president ought not use the bully pulpit to encourage the best practices, I would say the second most job of importance to the president, second to being commander in chief, is to be the communicator in chief. And we're losing a lot of kids in this country. A third don't graduate. For a president to say that's none of my business? It's recklessly irresponsible. A president needs to say it's unacceptable that that many kids leave our schools every single day.


 Well, I like the laundry list that everybody's had, and I would agree that every one of those things is important. Reality is none of that's going to happen till we bring the country back together. I think the first priority of the next president is to be a president of all the United States. We are right now a very polarized country, and that polarized country has led to be a paralyzed government. We've got Democrats who fight Republicans, liberals fighting conservatives, the left right the right. Who's fighting for this country again? We've got to even quit fighting amongst ourselves, as conservatives and as Republicans, and start putting the better interests of this nation. If that doesn't happen we'll get none of these things done. We've got to be the united people of the United States, and a president has got to somehow remind us that we are a great, resilient nation that has to stick together to solve all of these problems.


 If a person says, “I'm a person of faith, but I don't let it influence me and I don't talk about it,” what they've just told me is that their faith is so immaterial, insignificant, and inconsequential that it really isn't a faith at all. If it's a faith it will drive their judgment, it will drive their value system and, therefore, it'll help define them. It's ludicrous to say that I have faith but it doesn't impact me at all.


 The two overriding principles are you treat others as you wish to be treated. As it relates in health care, that means that we recognize that a person who is sick shouldn't be treated differently because they're in poverty than a person who has extraordinary wealth, that we have some sense of balance in how we approach that. That's the essence of what America is about. The second basic principle is that in as much as you've done it to the least of these, my brethren, you've done it unto me. As it relates to both health, education, or any policy, what it really m4eans is that you go back to what the founding fathers said. All of us are created equal, endowed by our Creator with those rights, life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.


 Well, I think I just tried to give them to you, both in education that everyone has an opportunity – you give education and health care, that you don't have some that are more equal than others. So there has to be a sense in which you have opportunity, whether it's through choice in charter schools in the education field, you have a curriculum that touches every child, not just a few. And in health care, you don't have a health care system like Congress has that is incredibly almost platinum. But there are a lot of Americans who can't even go to the doctor and find out if they're critically ill or if they have a terminal disease.


 I'm going to be a lot more careful about everything I say, because I find it gets amplified to a new level.


 Well, I would make it one of them too.

(Laughter)


 I've noticed that, yes.


 Well, first of all, you know, the semantics about taxes and fees, if you're a small business owner or you pay the fee, it's as much out of your pocket. You can call it a fee, you can call it a tax, it's still money the government's taking from you. It's the same thing.

Here's what I do know. I know that there had never been a broad- based tax cut
in the 160-year history of my state, and I signed the first one. I know that I
cut taxes 94 times and the taxes we cut helped families.

We eliminated the marriage penalty. We doubled the child tax care credit. We
indexed the income tax for inflation. We created the property taxpayer bill of
rights. We froze property taxes for seniors so they didn't lose their homes
due to increases in property taxes.

When I became governor, from the time I left 10.5 years later, sales tax was
up one penny and the income tax was the same. It's just a lot of people didn't
have to pay it because we raised the threshold at which they did. But here's
something else we did. We took a $200 million deficit and turned it into an
$850 million surplus. We improved our schools and paid teachers better, had
some of the most significant test score results. It was based on a court case
that I had inherited from two governors ago, Bill Clinton, Jim Guy Tucker,
and, finally, it landed on my desk and we actually finally got it resolved.

We also rebuilt our road system. People want roads and the people in my state
voted by an 80 percent margin to vote for those roads and to pay three cents a
gallon for gasoline.

Government is supposed to work. It's not about the politics of saying I never
raised a tax. It's about saying I made government work.


 And the fact is there were specific issues that I've been attacked for, sometimes pretty brutally on some of these television spots, but I'm proud of the fact that I governed and lowered taxes, and did something that had never been done in my state, and did it against the headwinds of a Democratic legislature that had never done it in 160 years before.


 You know, Mitt, let's talk about how stubborn the facts are. Answer the question.


 The fees I think you raised were more like half a billion dollars, not $240 million. You came into office…


 … with a deficit, and you left with one.


 And you opposed those Bush tax cuts in 2002.


 All right.


 We raised jobs, we built our roads.


 You know, Mitt…


 … you spent tens of millions of dollars sayings all negative things about me. If someone raises a question, you say it's a personal attack. And facts are stubborn things, and you mentioned that. And did you support or oppose the 2002 Bush tax cuts?


 By a court order that said we had to improve education. Maybe -- maybe you don't have to obey the court in Massachusetts. I did in Arkansas. And you know something? Education is a good thing for kids, because kids…


 … because kids like me wouldn't be sitting here if it weren't for…


 The reason that our campaign is catching fire is because people would rather elect a president who reminds them of the guy they work with, not the guy that laid them off.

(END VIDEO CLIP)


 He didn't lay me off. I plan to be president, so I hope he helps me get elected. This is not a reference to anybody. It's a reference to the spirit of this country. There's an issue in this country where a lot of people feel like that the folks elected in Washington don't have a clue about how much struggle is going on in the American family.

When people sit around their dinner tables at night, they feel the effect of
$3-a-gallon gasoline. They feel the effect of double- digit inflation on their
health care costs. They understand what it costs when college textbooks cost
as much as the tuition. They understand that, and they're working two jobs and
they're still not getting a great deal ahead from where they were the year
before.

I get called a lot of things. I still believe that we shouldn't have an
economic system that tries to make rich people poor. We just need one that
tries to make poor people have an opportunity to get rich. And that can't
happen when you have a government that becomes the greatest competitor with
small business.

Eighty percent of all our jobs, Chris, comes from small business in this
country, but the environment we've created, too much taxation, too much
regulation, too much litigation, is a result in job migration. We lose jobs
that go overseas that we ought to be keeping here. If that's populism, then
I'm guilty, because I think if you understand the struggle of a lot of
American families, our party had better wake up to that. If we don't, we're
going to lose, not just those families. We're going to lose what the Reagan
revolution was about. It was about getting those working-class people to
believe that the Republicans cared about them, had a message for them, would
empower them and give them a chance to live the American dream.


 Well, let me jump back in on that, because it sounds as if that I'm thinking that we ought to go after corporations. I'm the only person that says we ought to have no corporate tax, no personal income tax. We've got to get rid of taxes on dividends, capital gains and death. I really think our whole tax system…


 I'd like to get rid of death. I'm talking about the death tax.


 First, the death tax, then we'll get rid of death. In my previous profession, I dealt with getting rid of death, and now just the death tax.


 What I want to make sure is that people understand that if we have a tax system that penalizes productivity, it's counterintuitive to a good economic system. And, with all due respect, I think we've got to recognize that we have people who are in trouble today because sometimes folks who get into the capacity to buy up a company, they dissolve it, they split it up, people lose their jobs. And, when that happens, then they lose jobs, jobs go elsewhere, and then people who have taken those things can take their money, shelter it at maybe 15 percent income, not the 35 percent that the self-employed people in this country pay, or they can hide it away in a Cayman Island offshore bank account and pay no tax on it.

The average American is going to resent the fact that there is not a level of
equity in the tax system. And, again, I don't want to tax rich people and make
them poor. I want to give them every opportunity to be even richer.


 I did know that.


 Continue…


 Chris, I've been to 41 countries. I've been to Iraq, Afghanistan. I've been to Israel nine times. I've been to Syria, to Lebanon. I've been to Egypt. I've been all over Europe. I've been to Asia.

I've sat down with the heads of state, heads of multi-national countries.
Governors lead trade missions. Governors deal with cultural exchanges, both
here and abroad. As far as executive experience, I've got more than anyone
running for president in terms of Democrat or Republican in running a
government -- 10.5 years of being a governor; three years as being a
lieutenant governor.

And not only do I have the experience of doing it, but I have experience of
getting re-elected several times in a state where people of my party aren't
all that popular to start out with. So I must have done something right.

I was selected by my peers to be the chairman of the National Governors
Association. They must have thought something that I was doing was right. And
Time Magazine said that I govern my state in a way to be called one of the
five best governors in the country.

I think my leadership skills are clear. I led my state, and in every single
area we improved -- education, health care, transportation, natural resources,
job growth, cut taxes. Those are the areas that made life better for the
people of my state.


 I don't think it's a pattern. I think it's a matter of when you make lots of speeches, there are going to be times when you have more of a slip. But I don't have a slip of my judgment. I don't have a slip of my character. I don't have a slip of the truth. I know where I stand. I have moral clarity. I have convictions.

Those convictions are solid, and they're the same that I've had for all my
life -- that American ought to be the strongest nation on earth, that we ought
to have the kind of military that nobody on this planet wants to engage in a
battle, knowing that if they do, they're going to face the most unbelievably
irresistible military force that's ever been assembled, knowing also that if
they do engage that force, we will use everything in our power -- there will
be no light footprint.

There will be heavy boots coming down on those would challenge us, and
ultimately, if we have to engage -- and God help us that we hopefully don't --
but if we do, we won't have politicians who would interfere with the
battlefield command decisions that have to be made by the people who have
blood on their boots and medals on their chest.

And I'll be honest with you. Of the five of us sitting at this table, we all
bring certain skills -- every one of us. Some are going to be a little
different than others. I don't even think it's fair to say that a senator
can't be a good president. We've had senators who were.

I think governors make good presidents, because they have in essence run a
microcosm of the federal government and every aspect of those agencies. So
they understand what the issues are. But it's ultimately the American people
making a decision not about what we know, but about what kind of character do
we have that would come to the table and make tough decisions.


 On the Guantanamo issue, I felt we should keep it open until the court case had come down indicating that there was no real substantive difference in whether they were in Guantanamo or Leavenworth. And I think that sort of changes the picture.

The fact is, I don't care what the rest of the world thinks. I care what
America thinks. And it's become a divisive issue.

I went to Guantanamo, I visited it. Quite frankly, I visited every prison in
my state. I know a little bit about the difference between what we operate and
what we were operating at Guantanamo.

It wasn't that it wasn't too bad. The truth is, it was too darn good.

The conditions down there were amazingly hospitable. I thought a little bit
too much for my taste, considering what these people had done.


 So it's a matter of believing that we ought to have policy that brings this country together and not tears it apart. I don't think where we keep these people is as important as it is that we keep them and we don't let them go.


 The courts are in a case right now to decide whether or not that that's going to be held.


 But what I'm saying is if they're going to be the same…


 … in Leavenworth as Guantanamo, it shouldn't matter where they are geographically.


 Not at all, because as long as those children are here and people question their authenticity for being here, they live in the shadows. They live hiding.

No person living in the United States of America, Chris, ought to live in the
shadows, ought to live in fear, ought to hide. The beauty of this country is
we live with our heads up. We live with dignity, we live with pride, we live
with honor, and as long as people are living illegally, they can't.

And I know I'm going to be questioned, do I still stand by that idea that we
treat the children differently, who didn't commit a crime? And let me just be
very clear, yes, I do stand beside that, because I don't think you punish a
child for what a parent did.

Now, the fact is, under the plan that I put forth -- and it's tough. It says
build a fence. It does say after you have a fence, I believe built by American
laborers with American material, people should be asked to go back and get in
the back of the line. The only place to get in the back of the line is in
their home country. There's no line here.


 Mitt, I'm talking to Chris right now, if you don't mind.


 Well, you can ask it, but I've decided that you're the moderator of the debate, not Mitt, and he's tried to engage me in this.

And I appreciate you very much, but I believe I'll let Chris be the moderator
here.


 Well, here's the point. If the families go back, they're going to take their children with them. And when those children go back and then they get in line and they get back into the United States, then this issue is resolved.

The reason we have the problem we have is because our federal government has
broken it, has caused it to be dysfunctional, and we've got to get it fixed.

The one thing I do agree, whether it's with Senator McCain, Mayor Giuliani,
Fred Thompson, anyone here, is that this problem isn't going to get solved by
seeing if we can throw flash words at each other. It's going to get solved
when we sit down like reasonable human beings and decide that we've got to do
something that fixes the problem by sealing the border, first and foremost.
But I absolutely believe that as a governor, I had to educate those kids. That
wasn't an option for me. The mayor had the same situation in New York. By law,
you educate children and, also, it doesn't make sense to turn kids out on the
street, because then you're going to end up with a much bigger problem in the
education policy.


 OK.


 I guess his parents could leave him there if he's a senior in high school, but I think most families, particularly if you understand about most of the immigrant families, they're a family- loving people. These are not people that want to split their families up, they want to keep their families together.

They come here for their families, Chris. They come here so their kids will
have an opportunity. They come here so their kids have groceries to eat.

These are people who don't come here because they're escaping wealth so they
can come to poverty. They're escaping poverty so they can have a chance to
have wealth.

And the point I'm making is that if we're going to have this problem fixed,
let's actually fix it. And all the rhetoric that we've thrown out about who is
more for amnesty and who is less for amnesty, I mean, a lot of that is pure
nonsense.

What we need to do is say, seal the border, have a plan to get in the back of
the line. No free rides.

We won't have amnesty. And I think every one of us, including John McCain,
agrees with that. Get a system that we can live it, and then let's don't ever
make this mistake again.

We all love to invoke the name of Ronald Reagan. Let's not forget, with all
due respect, Ronald Reagan was the one who signed the amnesty bill back in the
'80s that's given us the mess now.

We all love him, we all want to be like him, but even Ronald Reagan can make
mistakes. And we need to fix the mistake.


 Well, there were some of the things in the ads that were misleading, but I'm also at the point where I realize that I made a tough decision.

It was, frankly, a tough decision, because you're very tempted to go out and
respond to these negative attack ads with a counterpunch. I made the decision
I wasn't going to do that.

And I think the people of Iowa rewarded me handsomely with this resounding
victory, even though I was incredibly outspent and outmanned there. I think it
was a great affirmation of what people are looking for in their next
president.

They want a president who's for something, not who's just against the other
people who are running for president. And I really believe the decision I made
was part of the reason that we won and won decisively.

And I think it's one of the reasons we're going to continue to win in this
country, because people are looking for a positive president who leads not so
much horizontally -- left, right, liberal, conservative, Democrat, Republican
-- but vertically, up, not down.

And I'm absolutely convinced that if we could change the tone and the tenor of
the political discourse in this country and make it where it is more civil
that it would dramatically change the way we govern, as well as the way we get
to those offices.


 Yes, that's right. I remember the hymn quite well. It was "Almost Persuaded," though, Fred.


 Yes, Chuck Norris is standing outside right now.


 I'm not totally persuaded, because if you tell a half- truth as if it is the full truth, then it can become an untruth.

And if you talk about commutations and say, OK, there's commutations, but you
don't tell the whole story -- I had 8,700 applications on my desk, 8,700.
Denied 90 percent of them.

Some of them that I did were things like an 18-year-old with a hot check
conviction who at age 35 couldn't get a job without a pardon. Every state has
different laws as it relates to that.

When it comes to things like spending, no less than the New York Times took
that ad apart and said that it was absolutely untrue and said that the
spending in my state did not increase, as he had indicated, but that if you
took those figures that it was very comparable to what it increased in
Massachusetts and it was more like 3.9 percent during the 10.5 years that I
was governor.


 It's easier to take other people's records and to twist and to turn and to make them sound somewhat ominous, but one thing I do know is that the people of my state apparently like the way I governed, because they not only kept reelecting me -- and I think that's significant when you're a Republican in a state where 90 percent of the elected officials are Democrat.

But when I left office with a surplus and with better schools, better roads,
better health care, better natural resources and a better job market, I know
this, my approval ratings were still some of the highest of any elected
official in my state.


 I just want to say, I've met his mother.


 She's got the vigor. Of all the things we can criticize John McCain on, I wouldn't even go there.

(CROSSTALK)


 I think there are three things. First is a personal issue of having lived a life like a lot of Americans have lived it. And I think that's one of the reasons my campaign has connected with people.

Abraham Lincoln said God must love the common man, he made so many of them. I
think that's an important thing, to understand that struggle.


 I think another thing is consistency with the principles of our party, which is that we believe in lower taxes, less spending. We're a party that believes in the sanctity of human life. That's important to us; it's a critical issue.

Consistency on defending the Second Amendment and state's rights, also
believing that mothers and fathers raise better kids than governments do.
Governments shouldn't interfere and let parents raise their own kids.

And there are other principles, but I think the other issue is the practical
experience, having actually run a government for a long period of time, doing
it in such a way that your voters re-elected you, but doing it in such a way
that, at the end, you actually solved problems.

And Americans are looking -- more than they're looking for ideology, they're
looking for practical solutions to the problems that they deal with every day.
And they'd like to think that someone sitting at that desk is thinking about
their problems and not just getting re-elected.


 Chris, I hope we're not headed toward recession, but if we are, there's four factors that will be the reason. 

The first one is fuel prices. When gasoline gets as high as it is, and oil
goes to $100 a barrel, it impacts the way people live. It may not impact
people at the top, but people who barely make it from paycheck to paycheck
know that it doesn't just affect the fuel going to and from work.

Everything they reach for on the shelf of their store costs more because it
took more money to transport it to that store.


 So that's the first thing we have to realize, is with our dependency upon foreign oil, if we don't begin to reverse that and become energy independent, we well could continue this enslavement to foreign oil, and ultimately wreck our economy. 

The second thing, subprime mortgages. Two million people today in America risk
losing their homes. Now, there's culpability on both lender, as well as a lot
of borrowers who bought more home than they could.

And I commend the president. I think he's handled this right without trying to
rush in an do something with taxpayer money to fix this, but certainly to get
the parties to make it work.

Two other thing, health care costs, and the other is education cost. All those
factors together.

And a lot of people are working harder this year than a year ago, and yet
they're not getting ahead. Even if they make more money, they're not making
enough money to make up. So the first thing is not raise taxes, cut the
marginal tax rates, if anything, and eventually go to a fair tax which really
does stop the penalties on people's productivity.


 Well, I'm not sure anybody said we're not running for a Reagan term. I think I said I wasn't running for this president's third term, because each of us have to distinguish ourselves. 

So let me correct you on that, not that you would need correcting, Carl, but I
wanted to throw that in and make sure you go that right.

The Reagan Coalition has certainly not seen those same middle class, working
class Republicans feeling a part of the Republican Party as they should and
one of the things that I want us to do, both as a party and through this
election process, is once again make sure that people understand that when we
lower taxes, when we cut spending, when we have a strong national defense,
when we stick to our principles on the sanctity of human life and the primacy
of traditional marriage.

And we also unapologetically hold to the idea that the Second Amendment is
just as precious as the First Amendment; and, in fact, without the second, we
don't have the first, because we have no way to protect it.


 All of those things were a part of that Reagan coalition. I was a part of it in 1979 and a lot of the evangelicals who became a part of helping Ronald Reagan to be elected. 

Over the years, sometimes Republicans have thought that one part of that
coalition was more important than the other. I think they're all important,
and we need to recapture them.

But we need to make sure that we communicate that our party is just as
interested in helping the people who are single moms, who are working two
jobs, and still just barely paying the rent as we are the people at the top of
the economy.


 The Air Force has a saying that says that if you're not catching flak, you're not over the target. I'm catching the flak, I must be over the target. 

(APPLAUSE)


 Fred, I want to say, I appreciate the analysis of my record, but let me try to give you some of the facts of my record. 

I came into Arkansas as a governor. Put in that position as a lieutenant
governor when my predecessor, a Democrat, was forced out of office on a felony
conviction.

I did something that had not been done in my state in 160 years. I cut taxes,
with the legislature working with me, and we continued to do that 94 times.

We cut spending. I'll tell you, the most painful time of my being a governor
in 10 and a half years was looking at a budget that 91 percent of which was
pretty well fixed on education, Medicaid, and prisons -- and cutting 11
percent out of that budget.

Everywhere I went for about a year, and every person -- it may take me just a
moment longer, please.


 Because there were a lot of things on that catalog there. 


 Yes. 

Everywhere I went, I had people protesting me and screaming and yelling and
doing demonstrations because I cut government. But I stayed faithful to the
things that Ronald Reagan stayed faithful to.

You know, if Ronald Reagan were running tonight, there would be ads by the
Club for Growth running against him because he raised taxes a billion dollars
in his first year as governor of California. It would be $10 billion today.

What I did was I governed. And the people of my state must have liked the way
I did it, because they kept re-electing me.


 And that's greatest affirmation of all. 


 And I appreciate the opportunity to set that record straight, and hopefully, before the night's over, a few more things. 


 I'm going to trust that the president, with the information that he had and that those commanders had, made the right decision. I think we need to make it very clear, not just to the Iranians, but to anybody, that if you think you're going to engage the United States military, be prepared not simply to have a battle. Be prepared, first, to put your sights on the American vessel. And then be prepared that the next things you see will be the gates of Hell, because that is exactly what you will see after that. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I believe that those commanders, hopefully, and I believe they do have the judgment to make in those split-second decisions... 


 I support them having that capacity. That's what we train them for and they have lives of Americans at stake on those boats. And they ultimately have our lives at stake if they take the wrong decision and give the Iranians or anybody the idea that America is a nation that you can kick sand in our eyes. 

I think it's very important that we make it crystal clear that we will have
the most powerful, the best trained, the best-equipped military on the face of
the planet that has ever existed. And we hopefully will have one that no one
wants to engage in battle, but we'll make it clear that if they do, there'll
be a severe price to pay for engaging us.


 Well, we've spent $12 billion, and it was supposed to be to fight terrorism. We really don't know how much of that money was used to fight terrorism. In fact, we know a lot of it was used to build up their own military. 

So there is a problem with accountability and the money. And I think we now
are in a position more than ever that we should ask the Musharraf government
for a better accounting. And it also ought to buy us some leverage with the
Musharraf government.

I want to agree with my colleagues. Several of them have mentioned that it's
not the best idea just to try to push Musharraf out, because we don't know who
might come into that vacuum.

And that's why it is important to make sure that we communicate with him, that
our displeasure with his inability to go after Osama bin Laden, and part of
the problem is he tells us that that part of the area he doesn't control. On
the other hand, he says, "I don't want you going in. Let me do it, and give me
the money."

He can't have it both ways. And that has to be communicated to him in the
strongest way.

But my final seconds, I'd like to just, with all due respect, Congressman
Paul, the issue of whether the president should be in the Middle East comes to
something that I think we've got to recognize.

We've got one true ally in the Middle East, and that's Israel. It's a tiny
nation. I've been there nine time. I've literally traveled from Dan to
Beersheba, and I understand something of that nation and the vulnerability of
it.

And for us to give the world the impression that we would stand by if it were
under attack and simply say, "It's not our problem," would be recklessly
irresponsible on our part.

And if I were president, you can rest assured that we would not let an ally be
annihilated by those enemies which is surround it, who have openly stated it
is their direct intention to destroy that nation. It would not happen under my
presidency.


 My idea of government is to get the job done and make sure that you balance your budget, that you respond to the needs of your people. I don't think the federal government needs any more money. That's why I have signed a pledge that I would not raise taxes as president. 

You brought up something about what I raised. Let me tell you what I raised,
Chris.

I raised hope. I raised the expectation of the kids in my state who didn't
have a decent education. And our courts ordered us to put more money into it.

And rather than just act about my political future, I acted about the future
of those kids. And this week, just, in fact, yesterday, American kids came and
said that our schools were now the eighth best in the nation, which is a long
way from 49th. We raised what we hoped those kids would have -- those kids in
the delta who had little access to health care that was affordable, even
accessible.

Roads were horrible.


 I took on the worst road system in the country, according to Trucker's Magazine. When I left, they said it was the most improved road system in the country. We had no bridges falling down in Arkansas. 

We also improved our natural resources and environment so that every kid could
go hunting and fishing and not have to be a part of an expensive club.

I cut taxes. I managed government. I raised the quality of life by making sure
that education, and health, and highways were accessible to every kid in that
state.


 Well, certainly I would. 

Senator Thompson, I appreciate you and the other members of Congress passing
welfare reform, but it was up to the governors to make it work. And as a
governor, we made it work in my state and took half the people off welfare and
got them into jobs.

During my tenure, we had the lowest unemployment records in the history of our
state and we created a record number of jobs, and jobs that paid more money
than the jobs they replaced.

It's easy to be in Congress and pass a bill that maybe will change some
mandates to the states, but those of us who had to govern at the state level
were forced with something that members of Congress didn't have to do. They
actually had to make it work.


 You know, it's interesting, everybody says religion is off limits, except we always can ask me the religious questions. So let me try to do my best to answer it. 

(APPLAUSE) And since -- if we're really going to have a religious service, I'd
really feel more comfortable if I could pass the plates, because our campaign
could use the money tonight, Carl.

(LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE)

We'll just go all the way.

First of all, if anybody knows my wife, I don't think they for one minute
think that she's going to just sit by and let me do whatever I want to. That
would be an absolute total misunderstanding of Janet Huckabee.

The whole context of that passage -- and, by the way, it really was spoken to
believers, to Christian believers. I'm not the least bit ashamed of my faith
or the doctrines of it. I don't try to impose that as a governor and I
wouldn't impose it as a president.

But I certainly am going to practice it unashamedly, whether I'm a president
or whether I'm not a president. But the point...

(APPLAUSE)

... the point, and it comes from a passage of scripture in the New Testament
Book of Ephesians is that as wives submit themselves to the husbands, the
husbands also submit themselves, and it's not a matter of one being somehow
superior over the other. It's both mutually showing their affection and
submission as unto the Lord.

So with all due respect, it has nothing to do with presidency. I just wanted
to clear up that little doctrinal quirk there so that there's nobody who
misunderstands that it's really about doing what a marriage ought to do and
that's marriage is not a 50/50 deal, where each partner gives 50 percent.

Biblically, marriage is 100/100 deal. Each partner gives 100 percent of their
devotion to the other and that's why marriage is an important institution,
because it teaches us how to love.

(APPLAUSE)


 Wendell, I think there is a great misperception that Hispanic people in this country somehow are soft and weak on immigration. They are not. Those who have come here legally, who have stood in line, who have patiently waited to get in this country are some of the ones who insist that we enforce the law. 

What I think we ought to do is to certainly start with a secure border,
because nothing else matters until then. But we can have a period of time.

I created a nine-point immigration policy that says there's a 120-day period
in which people go to their home country and they start the process from the
back of the line. And when people say, how will the government round them up?
The government didn't round everybody up to get here.

The government doesn't have to round everybody up to get back in line. That's
nonsense. People got themselves here, they can get themselves to the back of
the line.

The point we need make is that when people do come here, they ought to live
with their heads up. They ought to live in the light, not the darkness. They
ought to not be afraid of seeing a police car.

It's not just in our benefit that we solve this problem. It's in the benefit
of those who do come to this country so nobody looks at a person of maybe
Hispanic origin and questions whether or not they are legal. We ought to have
the assumption that everybody here is legal, that nobody here is illegal.


 You know, it's going to be really more do the voters trust him, and do they trust me. I know this: I balanced a budget every year I was governor. I left a surplus of $850 million coming up from a deficit of $200 million. I know I signed the first- ever broad-based tax cuts. And I know that I made tax cuts that really impacted families by eliminating the marriage penalty, doubling the child care tax credit, raising the income level at which people paid their income tax. 

But let me speak to the really heart of what I think a lot of Americans are
concerned about with the economy. And frankly, in talking about the stimulus
package, one of the concerns that I have is that we'll probably end up
borrowing this $150 billion from the Chinese. And when we get those rebate
checks, most people are going to go out and buy stuff that's been imported
from China. I have to wonder whose economy is going to be stimulated the most
by the package.

And I'm grateful that something is being done. I think we all could at least
acknowledge that it's good to see Congress working with the president to do
something.

But if we're going to spend $150 billion, I'd like to suggest that maybe we
add two lanes of highway from Bangor all the way to Miami on I-95. A third of
the United States population lives within 100 miles of that.

This nation's infrastructure is falling apart. And if we built those lanes of
highways -- with American labor, American steel, American concrete -- I
believe it would do more to stimulate the economy.

And the reason I say that is because when we were going through a recession in
my state, we were in the middle of a billion-dollar highway construction
program that brought about 40,000 jobs and brought a billion dollars of
capital into the economy. That's a long- term stimulus package that I think
would have more impact on the American long-term future. And it would keep
social capital from being wasted, fuel wasted. A lot of people in Florida sit
around in traffic every day, never getting to their kids' dance recitals or
soccer games because they're stuck in traffic, and we've done nothing about
it.


 Well, Tim, let me remind you, I wasn't in Washington during all this time, so that's one of the reasons they ought to give me a chance since I wasn't there messing this up. 


 I don't think you can blame all of this on President Bush. The president also has done, I think, a fine job of making sure that the focus of his White House was also keeping us safe. 

But let's look at those economic issues. A few months ago, when we were all in
Dearborn, Michigan, your network was the sponsor with CNBC and MSNBC, and
every one of us were asked, "How's the economy doing?" every one of my
colleagues said, "It's doing great," and they gave all the numbers.

When they came to me, I know people acted like I was the only guy at the U.N.
without a headset that night. But the truth is, I was the only guy on that
stage who said it may be doing great if you're at the top. But if you talk to
the people at the bottom of the economy, the people who are handling the bags,
the people who are serving the food, you get a very different picture, because
their health care costs are up dramatically.

The cost to educate their children are up. And the cost of their fuel has way
outstripped any wage increase they've had.

Now, often we hear people talk about trickle-down economics, that if you have
a wonderful surge in the economy that it eventually works it way down to all
sectors. But there's another issue, too: there is a trickle-up impact when the
economy begins to go sour. And if you pay attention to the people who are the
single moms and the working people who barely get from paycheck to paycheck,
you'd find out months in advance that this economy was headed for a downward
turn. And that's what I think people need in the president, is somebody who
understands the totality of the American family and not just the folks at the
top.


 I supported the president when he led us into this, as did the Democrats. And I think we owe him not a lot of scorn; we owe him our thanks that he had the courage to recognize there was a potential of weapons of mass destruction, and whether than wait until we had another attack, he went and made sure that it wasn't going to happen from Saddam Hussein. 

Now, everybody can look back and say, oh, well, we didn't find the weapons. It
doesn't mean they weren't there. Just because you didn't find every Easter egg
didn't mean that it wasn't planted.

My point is that when the president acted, this country was united in
believing it was a necessary thing to do. It's easy to second-guess a
president. Whoever of us is elected, we'll be second- guessed, too. But I hope
we have the courage and the resolve, once we commit to something, to make sure
that we don't back away just because the polls say we should.


 Well, the reason that it's getting resonance is because people would love to see the IRS abolished. They know, as Dr. Phil might say: We've had it since 1913; how's that working out for us? It's not working out so well. The fact is we're penalized for productivity in this country. The harder you work, the more you earn, the more the IRS and the government wants from you. 

What the Fair Tax does is says, we want you to earn; we want you to save and
we want you to buy things and sell things and make a profit. Republicans ought
to embrace the Fair Tax, as should Democrats, because it stops this nonsense
and goes to the common sense of the idea that we should encourage people to
work and get something for it.

(Cross talk.)

Now, on the bottom end of the spectrum, here's the thing. A lot of people have
never read the entire Fair Tax because when I first heard about the Fair Tax,
the consumption tax, quite frankly it sounds like it would be oppressive and
regressive to the poor. The poor come out best of all because of the provision
in the Fair Tax called the prebate in which every American, each month, is
given the amount of the Fair Tax back up to the level of poverty. Everybody
gets it, not just those under the level of poverty.

It actually untaxes the poor, untaxes the elderly. It makes sure that we don't
end up paying taxes on groceries and medicine and the basic necessities of
life. And for each third of the economy, there is a benefit, about a 14
percent benefit for those at the bottom; those in the middle, about a 7
percent; even those at the very top end of the economy end up with about a 5
percent benefit.

Everybody gets in the economy -- no more underground economy. Drug dealers,
prostitutes, pimps, gamblers, non-Republicans -- (laughter) -- all of those
people out there will be paying taxes. Nobody's working under the table.

And so you have now a broad base in which you're receiving the money. And it's
a completely different, transparent tax system, as opposed to the one now,
where about 22 percent of our products we buy, the tax is hidden into it.

Corporations don't pay tax; they build that cost in, pass it on to the
consumer.


 And what's killing the American economy is that embedded tax and the invisibility of the tax. That's why I support the Fair Tax. 


 I want to -- I want to put the IRS out of business. 


 Well, first of all, Tim, it's 23 percent if we were to break even. 

And they're not paying 15 percent; that's in their visible tax in the terms of
the takeout from their checks. When you include the built-in tax, the embedded
tax in the products we buy that corporations build in, the average American is
paying 33 percent in his or her taxes. The average American is working through
the month of May just to pay off the government. It would be a dramatic
difference if the taxpayers got to choose the taxes, which they would do under
the Fair Tax.

I think most of us realize that there's got to be a better system. The one we
have now is irreparably broken. It's chased jobs. Now we have $12 trillion of
working capital moved offshore because our tax system has chased it away.


 Mitt, I'd like to ask you a question that came up during your interview with Tim Russert on "Meet the Press," and it has to with the Second Amendment. You have indicated that you support Second Amendment, but on that interview, you indicated that you also supported a ban on so-called -- and I use the term "so-called" -- assault weapons and supported Brady. 

For many of us who are strong adherents of the Second Amendment, that's not
quite consistent, to say you're for Brady and so-called assault gun ban, but
supported the Second Amendment, because we see that -- that's really a denial
of the Second Amendment. I'd appreciate some clarification on do you support
Brady, do you support the assault weapon ban, and your position on exactly
what restrictions government should put on Second Amendment rights.


 I'm going to address that but I want to first comment on Mitt's decision on the -- putting an extraordinary amount of money in the campaign. 

First of all, let me say, you've got five exceptional sons I know you're very
proud of. And you said you wanted them to inherit a great country, and I have
a solution, Mitt, that I think will work. If the country will elect me
president, they'll inherit a great country. And your boys will still get your
money, too, and I think that would be a great answer. So I want to offer that
as a solution tonight for inheritance.

On the Social Security question, one of the reasons that we're in trouble is
because we have a smaller group of people paying into the Social Security
system, fewer wage earners, more Americans getting their wealth from dividends
and from investments.

So you have a shrinking supply -- you have 10,000 baby boomers a day getting
into the system.

One of the reasons I'm a strong supporter of the Fair Tax is that you suddenly
have a different funding stream for Social Security. It comes out of the
general fund. So you now have a more reliable, a more stable and a much
broader funding system that will supply Social Security.


 Well, you know, everybody keeps talking about how unlikely it is. 


 It was unlikely that we'd go to the moon. 


 It was unlikely that we would have the Manhattan Project. 


 Being president -- now, Tim, I just want to say everybody talks about how unlikely these things are. That's what's wrong in America. We're -- we're always talking about what we can't do. We need to be talking about what we can do, whether it's energy independence, whether it's passing a tax system that'll work. And I do believe when you have an economy that brings that $12 trillion that's parked offshore -- bring it back to this country, then you have a true economic stimulus, more people going back to work in America, people making wages, and that's where -- that's where we start seeing the capacity to pay for Social Security. 


 I did hear what Chuck said. I was standing with him and I didn't disagree with him at the time, because I was standing next to him. It's as simple as that. This is a guy who can put this foot on that side of my face, and there's nothing I can do about it. (Laughter.) 

Now, I have said publicly, in fact, I think it was the debate we had, gosh,
back in New Hampshire. And I publicly said and I have said it many times, I
don't think that Senator McCain lacks the rigor and the capacity to be
president. And I said, if you look at his mother and see her strength at 95,
of all the things we can pick on Senator McCain for, that ain't one of them.
(Laughter.)


 There may be some other things I could pick on Senator McCain about, but -- but not that. And frankly, I think he's demonstrated in the campaign that he's got the capacity to run. He and I would have different approaches to be president, but I promise you that is not an issue for me. It might be for Chuck, but I'm far enough away from him that I feel comfortable in saying that now. (Laughter.) 


 I would say that would be his problem, not mine. My faith does not give me a queasy feeling; it gives me a solid core from which I'm able to live every day. I don't wake up every day and have to look at a poll to decide what I believe. My faith grounds me. It gives me some sense of direction and purpose. I don't try to impose it on other people, and I certainly would never use the auspices of government to try to push my faith. But for me to run from it? Impossible. It's who I am. And so if it gives some people a queasy feeling, then they'll have to deal with it. 

The fact is, this country has always been a country where people were able to
respect people who had faith. And frankly, we ought to be able to respect
people who don't have any. I mean, I don't feel like a person has to share my
faith to share my love of this country. But if a person hates me or dislikes
me because of my faith, I'm not sure if they understand what it means to truly
be an American, where we can live with each other no matter how different our
faith is.

But at least we have that understanding that historically faith has been an
important part of who this country is. Most Americans believe in God. As I've
often said, if you want a president that doesn't, you'll have to pick somebody
else.


 I don't think we are. 

And the real issue though -- let's not blame President Bush for all of this.
We've got a Congress who's sat around on their hands and done nothing but
spend a lot of money, and their spending, leaving us $9 trillion in debt, that
we're passing on to our grandchildren. I don't blame the president solely for
that.

So I think if we're asking, you know, is George Bush responsible for all this?

No. But are we better off? Well, let's look at some factors.

Right now home sales are -- new home starts anywhere are down 40 percent.
That's going to have a cascading impact on everybody who sells lumber, who is
in the building trades. If you talk to people who are driving trucks across
America today, their fuel prices are significantly higher than they were a
year ago. They're hurting because they're not making a lot more money to haul
something, but they're spending a lot more money to get it done. And all over
our economy with the unemployment up to 5 percent across the nation that means
there are a lot of families today that don't have a paycheck, and if you don't
have a paycheck, it's hard to put groceries on the table and it's hard to pay
the rent.

And I think what Americans are looking for is somebody who's just honest with
them and straight with them, and tell them that, no, it's not better and it's
not going to get better unless we have some serious leadership in Washington
that says that we're going to have to start having policies that touch the
people not just at the top, but the people at the bottom, and they feel like
they're invisible to a lot of people in government today.


 You know, I wish Rush loved me as much as I love Rush. I think he's a great voice for conservativism. It doesn't mean he's inerrant or infallible and on this, he's very wrong. 

And I want to make sure everybody understands, this isn't a two- man race.
There's another guy, I would like to say, down here on the far right of the
stage. You want to talk conservative credentials?

Let me get in on that.

I created the first-ever broad-based tax cuts in the 160-year history of my
state, when I became governor, with a 90 percent Democrat legislature. I also
balanced a budget every one of the 10- and-a-half years. The only person
that's sitting here today that has consistently supported a human life
amendment, that's been part of our Republican platform since 1980, and also
supports a marriage amendment to our Constitution -- two conservative
hallmarks.

I believe in less government. I believe in lower taxes, not higher.

I think it's important to streamline the federal government, like we
streamlined some services in Arkansas. Simple things like getting a driver's
car tag, because it used to take a couple of days and about seven pieces of
paper. We streamlined it so it could be done on the Internet in 4-1/2 minutes.
We consolidated state agencies. We cut 11 percent out of the budget.

One of the things that Rush Limbaugh once praised me for was creating what I
call the no -- the Tax Me More fund. The way that worked was that we had a lot
of people in our legislature wanted us to raise taxes, and I said we don't
need to raise taxes, we need to cut our spending. And so I created a fund
called the Tax Me More fund.

I said, there's nothing in the law that says that you can't just pay more if
you want to. And I had envelopes printed. And I said, anybody who wants to pay
more taxes, just fill it up with whatever will make you feel better, and send
it right in.

And it proved that a whole lot of people didn't really want to pay more taxes
after all, because after about a year and a half, there was only about $1,200
in the account, $1,000 of which had been given by a liberal legislator.

So if we're going to talk conservatism, I'd like to be in on the discussion.


 Well, I was a governor two-and-a-half years. I was chairman of the National Governors Association, which means that my fellow governors selected me to chair the organization of all 50 governors. 

Let me tell you why I believe that Governor Schwarzenegger ought to be able to
carry out the plan. Because if he's right, every other state's going to copy
him. And if he's wrong, every other state's going to recruit the jobs that he
lost in California to their own states.

The genius of our system has always been that if you have states acting as
laboratories of good government, rather than mess it up for all 50 states, you
get the chance to find out, does it work? And if it does, we all copy it. And
then we make a little change and we claim it for our own. If it doesn't work,
we do everything we can to make sure that the jobs that maybe he loses, we get
in our own state.

It's the genius of our founding fathers, when they had the idea of federalism.
Thomas Jefferson was right, and Alexander Hamilton was wrong. That debate, we
thought, was settled. But we've got a federal government that wants to give us
unfunded mandates at the state level and doesn't want us to experiment with
ideas in good government that might solve a lot of the problems that our
country faces.


 Well, if we end up with the rebates, we're going to borrow the $150 billion from China. And when we turn it into rebates, most people are going to go out and buy some consumables, like a pair of shoes that they probably don't even need, but they're going to buy them, and they're most likely an import from China. My point is, whose economy are we stimulating when we do that? 

The Heritage Foundation did a pretty interesting study on past rebates and
found that it does not really stimulate the economy in the way that we hope
that it will.

My point was that if you really want an economic stimulus package, look at
what infrastructure investment does, and we've got a crumbling infrastructure.
I don't have to tell the people of California that traffic is clogged, and the
reason that we have a problem is that because we're not addressing is that
because we're not addressing it. Every billion dollars we spend on highway
construction results in 47,500 jobs, but the fact is, the average American is
sitting in traffic 38 hours a year. That's a full work week -- not on
vacation, not spent with their kids, stuck in traffic, just sitting there
behind the wheel pointing fingers, usually one at a time, at other motors
(sic) -- (laughter) -- and very upset with what's going on around them in the
traffic.

The point is we are burning a lot of fuel up into the air polluting the
environment. We're wasting time. Parents never get home to their kids' soccer
games and recitals. And the real sad thing is we have bridges falling down on
people in the United States of America.

Now, my point is -- and it's not necessarily just I-95 from Bangor to Miami. I
said that when I was in Florida. Today we might look at a Western highway that
would go down the California coast. (Laughter.) But my point is that
infrastructure in this country has been neglected, whether it's our airports,
our bridges, our roads.

And I don't think there's a governor in a state that wouldn't tell you that
you'll create more jobs and you'll build it with American workers, American
concrete and American steel. That's stimulus.


 I think the Supreme Court's already ruled on that. 

The real issue is, that doesn't fix the problem.

What we've got to do is to have a secure border fence, something I propose
that we do within 18 months of taking office. If we don't have a secure fence,
and have just this open door that people can come in and out at will, we're
never going to deal with this issue effectively and responsibly.

And today many Americans are angry, not that people want to come here, and I
have repeatedly said -- I'm going to say it again -- people in this country, I
think, are grateful to God they're in a land that people are trying to break
into and not one they're trying to break out of. So it's not that we're
building a fence so we can keep our people in or keep people out, but that
people who do come here would have to come legally.

And -- and touching the issue of -- of those born here is not the challenge.
It's two things. It's first making sure that that fence is built, I think
within 18 months. And the second thing is that we have a process where the
people who are here would have to go to the back of the line and start over.

And it's not to be cruel. I want to make sure you understand.

It's to make -- that everybody who's living in our boundaries has their head
up and lives in the light, not the darkness, and doesn't run and hide every
time they see a police car. We owe it not just to the people who have waited
in line a long time; we owe it to the people who do want to live here and work
here, but create a system that is legal, that makes sense and that actually
protects our borders, but protects the dignity and worth of every person.


 History will have to determine that. And I'm not going to come to the Reagan Library and say anything about Ronald Reagan's decisions. I'm not that stupid. (Laughter.) If I was, I'd have no business being president. (Laughter.) 

I think we need to talk about why the issue of right to life is important. For
many of us, this is not a political issue, this is an issue of principle and
conviction. And it goes to the heart of who we are as a country.

If we value each other as human beings and believe that everybody has equal
worth and that that intrinsic value is not affected by net worth or ancestry
or last name or job description or ability or disability, then the issue of
the sanctity of human life is far bigger than just being anti-abortion; it's
about being pro-life and exercising that deep conviction held by our Founding
Fathers that all of us are equal and no one is more equal than another;
recognizing that once we ever decide that some people are more equal or less
equal than other, then we start moving that line, and it may include us
someday.

And that's why for many of us -- and me included -- let me be very clear. I'm
pro-life. I value every human being and I would always make every decision,
always, on the side of life, every time I could, without equivocation.


 Well, first of all, I didn't come here to umpire a ball game between these two. (Laughter.) I came here to get a chance to swing at a few myself. So I'd appreciate maybe a question that we could talk about that would involve some of us down here at the end who have been left out of the discussion for the last few minutes. 


 Let's hope it doesn't take that long. But the one thing I do agree with is that we need to leave with victory and we need to leave with honor. And the reason we need to is because if we leave a bigger mess in Iraq than is there now, it is not just going to affect Iraq, it's going to affect the rest of the Middle East. 

It will erupt in a completely destabilized environment, into which that vacuum
is exactly the kind of situation that al Qaeda can build a strong base; Iran
would love to be able to see a destabilized Iraq because they've been fighting
in Iraq and for Iraq for a long time. If we leave it vulnerable, all we've
done is create a situation that the rest of the world is going to have to be
back into sooner or later for all of our interests.

And with all due respect, Congressman Paul -- and I do think you're right, we
don't want to be there for 100 years -- but however long it takes to get out
of there with victory and with honor, we owe it to those who have gone to make
sure that they did not go in vain, and we need to make sure that future sons
and daughters of America don't have to go back and do it over.


 Well, good, I'd like to be here tonight. Thank you. 


 Well, I don't know that I can read people's souls that well, and I've spent a lot of my life looking at people and talking to them. But I look at people's actions, because you can look into their eyes, and their eyes can lie, but their actions don't. 

And when people take actions that cause us to give concern to human rights
violations, to oppression, and I don't care what their eyes are saying; their
actions are speaking a whole lot louder than their eyes ever will. And we need
to be looking at what people are doing, not just what they're saying, and
recognizing that our foreign policy needs to reflect an extraordinary
strength. We need to make sure that the rest of the world knows that we're
going to have a military that they're not want to engage for any purpose.

And I do believe that President Reagan was right. You have peace through
strength, not vulnerability. We've got to have an army that is well-staffed,
well-trained, well-financed and that is prepared for anything, and hopefully,
because it is so well-prepared, it never has to be used. We can't continue to
have one that is stretched and pulled and particularly -- and I'm very
sensitive to this having been a governor and watched some of our National
Guard troops spend three out of five years in active duty -- if we're going to
engage them, we have to make sure we've got enough troop strength of a regular
army and our Air Force and Navy that we don't have to have extended
deployments out of our Guard and Reserve units.


 Well, first of all, let me say -- a while ago, you said you were going to shower me with questions, and I think then you turned the spigot off, so I want to make sure I get a little time in here to get some time. 

I want to just say that I agree with something that Governor Romney said. He
talked about that governors are well prepared to be presidents. And I think
he's right about that. And if that's the case, then I appreciate his
endorsement, because I've been a governor and led a state longer than anybody
running for president, Democrat or Republican. I've actually managed a
government for 10 and a half years.

There's something a lot of people don't think about. When you're a governor,
you actually manage a microcosm of the federal government. Every agency that
you have at the federal level, you have at the state level. You are familiar
with the whole game board. You understand what those agencies do, because you
interrelate with them as a governor every single day.

But you know what the biggest frustration is? Washington doesn't understand
how states operate, but states understand how Washington operates, and that's
the fundamental difference. We understand, because unfunded mandates come
stomping down on top of us, wrecking our state budgets, creating a complete
imbalance of power, ignoring the 10th Amendment.

And that's one reason that a lot of us are ready to say it's time for a new
type of leadership that respects the 10th Amendment, that respects the fact
that governors are out there fighting to try to build a decent education
system, create jobs, make sure that we can give families a chance to have a
decent way of living. And that we get governments off the backs of mothers and
fathers who ought to be raising kids without a whole lot of government
interference.

Those are the reasons that I think when a governor gets to the White House, he
does understand that leadership is about looking at all of those issues and
realizing that there is no such thing as an isolated issue. Education, health
care, economic development -- they're all tied together, Anderson. And this is
something that I don't hear coming often from people, who, with all due
respect, in the legislative branch, have the luxury of picking out particular
issues that they can specialize in.

Governors don't get to specialize. They have to be able to handle on any given
day several dozen different issues and see how they integrate together for a
strong economy, a strong sense of security. And that's how it works.


 That's exactly -- real leadership recognizes what your decisions do to people at the bottom. That's what I mean by it, Anderson. 

You can't have a president who sees a whole bunch of America as invisible. If
you make a decision at the top and you don't understand how it affects the
person all the way at the bottom, then you're not ready to lead. Leadership is
about seeing the whole field.


 And that's what I'm talking about. And that's why -- listen, our Republican Party is going to be in trouble if we creating policies and acting like we don't understand what those folks are feeling out there waiting the tables, handling bags, driving the trucks, and moving the freight around. 


 I think it would be incredibly presumptuous and even arrogant for me to try to suggest what Ronald Reagan would do, that he would endorse any of us against the others. 

Let me just say this, I'm not going to pretend he would endorse me. I wish he
would. I would love that, but I endorse him, and I'm going to tell you why.

It wasn't just his specific policies, but Ronald Reagan was something more
than just a policy wonk. He was a man who loved this country, and he inspired
this country to believe in itself again.

What made Ronald Reagan a great president was not just the intricacies of his
policies, though they were good policies. It was that he loved America and saw
it as a good nation and a great nation because of the greatness of its people.

And if we can recapture that, that's when we recapture the Reagan spirit. It's
that spirit that has a can-do attitude about America's futures and that makes
us love our country whether we're Democrats or Republicans. And that's what I
believe Ronald Reagan did -- he brought this country back together and made us
believe in ourselves.

And whether he believes in us, I hope we still believe in those things which
made him a great leader and a great American.

(APPLAUSE)

 I'm Mike Huckabee. For 10 and a half years, I was governor of Arkansas. I'm from the small town of Hope. You may have heard of it. All I ask you is, give us one more chance. (Laughter.) 


 I think there's some real doubt about that, Wolf. But I want to remind all of us on this stage and the people in the audience that there's a reason that this is such a struggle. And I think we miss it over here in the West. Today's the birthday of Ronald Reagan. We all would believe that Ronald Reagan is the one who ended the Cold War, and Ronald Reagan is the one who helped bring about the collapse of the Soviet Union. 

But there's a group of people who don't believe that, and that's the Taliban.
They believe they brought about the demise of the Soviet Union because of the
way they fought in Afghanistan.

And what I want to just mention is that it is not the size of the dog in the
fight; it is the size of the fight in the dog. And we underestimate, grossly
underestimate how fierce this dog and how determined they are to destroy every
last one of us.


 It's interesting that that question would even be asked of somebody running for president. I'm not planning on writing the curriculum for an eighth-grade science book. I'm asking for the opportunity to be president of the United States. 

But you've raised the question, so let me answer it. "In the beginning, God
created the heavens and the Earth." To me it's pretty simple, a person either
believes that God created this process or believes that it was an accident and
that it just happened all on its own.

And the basic question was an unfair question because it simply asks us in a
simplistic manner whether or not we believed - in my view - whether there's a
God or not. Well let me be very clear: I believe there is a God. I believe
there is a God who was active in the creation process. Now, how did he do it,
and when did he do it, and how long did he take? I don't honestly know, and I
don't think knowing that would make me a better or a worse president.

But I'll tell you what I can tell the country. If they want a president who
doesn't believe in God, there's probably plenty of choices. But if I'm
selected as president of this country, they'll have one who believes in those
words that God did create. And as the words of Martin Luther, "Here I stand. I
can do no other." And I will not take that back.


 No, I did answer that, Wolf. I said I don't know. My point is, I don't know; I wasn't there. (Laughter.) But I believe whether God did it in six days or whether he did it in six days that represented periods of time, he did it, and that's what's important. 

But, you know, if anybody wants to believe that they are the descendants of a
primate, they are certainly welcome to do it. I don't know how far they will
march that back. But I believe that all of us in this room are the unique
creations of a God who knows us and loves us and who created us for his own
purpose.


 Wolf, I think it's already covered by the Uniform Code of Military Conduct. I think that's what Congressman Paul was saying. It's about conduct, it's not about attitude. 

But I'd like to ask you - you said a moment ago that you were going to all
give us a chance to deal with the issue of immigration.


 And I hope you'll do that. 


 You've held us to it; I want to hold you to it. 


 So if you'll give us that opportunity. 


 I just said I think it's a matter - it's not - you don't punish people for their attitudes. You punish them if their behavior creates a problem. And it's already covered by the Uniform Code of Military Conduct. That's - 


 I - what? 


 I don't think that I would. I think it's already covered by the existing policy that we do have, in fact. 


 Lost credibility because we didn't do what we were hired to do. When you're elected, you're hired to do a job. You're hired to cut spending, lower taxes, bring more government back to the local people. We did the polar opposite, and the people fired us. And I think in many ways, although there are some good people that got caught up in the tsunami of the 2006 elections, the Republican Party as a whole deserved to get beat. We've lost credibility - the way we bungled Katrina, the fact that there was corruption that was unchecked in Washington, and the fact that there was a feeling that there was not a proper handling of the Iraqi war in all of these details, and the indifference to people pouring over our borders. 

And let me just add this, Wolf, there are a lot of people for whom the
immigration issue is like a (lot of them ?). They see Washington not taking
the kind of positions to build a fence, and they know that when they go to the
airport to get on an airplane they have to show photo ID, they have to go
through layers of security, and they don't understand why someone coming
across an international border doesn't have to do the same thing.


 Not without reading the transcript. 


 Well, it looks like I'm getting all the moral questions tonight, and I guess that's a good thing. (Laughter.) That's better than getting the immoral questions. (Laughter.) So I'm happy to get those. 

I really believe that if you define in - a moral issue, it is our respect, our
sanctity and our understanding of the value of every single human life,
because that is what makes America a unique place on this planet. We value
every life of an individual as if it represents the life of us all.

Many of us who are pro-life, quite frankly, I think, have made the mistake of
giving people the impression that pro-life means we care intensely about
people as long as that child is in the womb, but beyond the gestation period,
we've not demonstrated as demonstrably as we should that we respect life at
all levels, not just during pregnancy.

We shouldn't allow a child to live under a bridge or in the back seat of a
car.

We shouldn't be satisfied that elderly people are being abused and neglected
in nursing homes. It should never be acceptable to us that people are treated
as expendable - any people. But the unique part of our country is that we
elevate and we celebrate human life.

And if you look at us with the contrast of the Islamic jihadists, who would
strap a bomb to the belly of their own child, march him into a crowded room,
set the detonator and kill innocent people, they celebrate death, we celebrate
life. It's the fundamental thing that makes us unique and it keeps us free. I
pray we never, ever abandon that basic principle. (Applause.)


 I think the people of America are pretty smart, and the fact is they know that if they have excessive taxation and a tax system that literally steps on their head, and they have a regulation system that makes it very difficult for our businesses to compete, and then we've got a system of immigration that we don't have confidence in, and in addition to that, we have litigation that makes it very difficult for our businesses to be able to operate in a free enterprise system, the result is a job migration. And if you ask what the president's problem was, it's a lack of communication to be able to really help us understand what those problems were and how we needed to solve them. 


 That's what we need to do. 


 No, I disagree with that. I think that there are a number of people that we should welcome into this country. And it's - certainly engineers and doctors and scientists that we may need legally coming here. 

What we need to do is to have a border that is sealed and the same kind of
process that we have to go through if we go into a stadium. We go in one at a
time and we have a ticket. That's the only thing I think Americans really are
asking us for is a sane, sensible system that's based on the idea that if you
come here, that you come here through the same process that we would be
expected to go through if we went to another country, which is not happening
today.


 Well, Tavis, I want to be president of the United States, not just president of the Republican Party. Frankly, I'm embarrassed. I'm embarrassed for our party and I'm embarrassed for those who did not come, because there's long been a divide in this country, and it doesn't get better when we don't show up. 

Quite frankly, for a lot of people there's a perception that Black Americans
don't vote for Republicans. I proved that wrong in Arkansas, with 48 percent
of African Americans voting for me.

But I want to make sure that the people of this country recognize that we've
come a long way, but we have a long way to go. And we don't get there if we
don't sit down and work through issues that are still very deep in this
country, when it comes to racial divide.

I'm honored to be here. I appreciate you having us. I wish all of the
candidates had come. But tonight we hopefully will make up their time and make
up their ground.


 Well, I would say, first of all, that I would hope they would name President Eisenhower. Because he sent those troops and federalized the National Guard in Little Rock, Arkansas in 1957, when it was a Democrat governor who stood at the schoolhouse door and said those young people couldn't come in. 

And I would like to believe, if I were fortunate enough to be the president,
that at the end of my tenure -- hopefully, eight years, by the way, not just
four -- that housing opportunities would be better, that we made some real
strides in the criminal justice system so that you don't have a different
sentence for a 17-year-old kid caught with a lid of marijuana than you do some
upper-middle-class white kid who gets caught with cocaine. He goes to rehab,
and the Black kid goes to prison for 10 years.

We'd change that. We'd have a different system as it relates to such things as
health care, because there is a disproportionate level of people in the
African American community with hypertension, with stroke, with diabetes. And
there needs to be a disproportionate level of funding to help them.

Those are the kind of things that could make a difference and end this divide
that we have.


 I don't believe the average American resents that people want to come here. I've said oftentimes we ought to get on our knees every night and thank God that we still live in a country that people are trying to break into, not one they're trying to break out of. 

But securing the border is something I think every one of us agree on. You've
got to have a secure border because otherwise our borders are not only open to
illegal immigrants, but to somebody bringing a suitcase with a dirty bomb.

But, more importantly, if we're going to deal with the supply, you touch it at
the point of the demand. And until something is done to touch the people who
are employing illegal immigrants because of the very reason that they've
talked about on this stage, to create what amounts to another version of slave
labor, then we're never going to stop the flow.

You're not going to get illegals to admit that they're here illegally, because
they're desperate enough to do anything to feed their families.

What we have to do is to start putting the penalty on the people who are most
benefiting from them, the employers who are using those laborers in order to
keep from having to pay decent wages.


 Well, first of all, we really don't have so much a crime problem in this country. We have a drug and alcohol problem. Eighty percent of the people who are in our prisons and jails are there for a drug or alcohol crime. They either were high or drunk when they committed the crime, or they committed the crime to get high or drunk. 

And what has made a huge mistake is that we've incarcerated so many of the
people who really need drug rehab more than they need long-term incarceration.

In our state, we established over 20 drug courts, that gave people an
alternative course, rather than just putting them in prison, giving them the
opportunity to get what they really needed, which is off the addiction.

We've got to quit locking up all the people that we're mad at and lock up the
people that we're really afraid of, the people who are sexual predators and
violent offenders.

But the nonsense of three strikes and you're out has created a system that is
overrun with people, and the cost is choking us.

I would go for more drug courts and for a lot less incarceration of drug-
addicted people.


 Well, I may be a little different on this one. I believe that the people of D.C. should be able to vote for representation. 

I think that's appropriate, for the simple reason of equality and justice. And
if we need to amend the Constitution to make that possible, it should happen.

D.C. is not the same city it was when it was first created, and I think it
just makes sense to not have a group of people -- I don't care what color they
are, I don't care how they vote -- they ought to be able to vote, and their
color and their political affiliation ought to have nothing to do with the
equality that we should give them.

As far as identification -- I have to show photo ID to get on an airplane in
my home town. I think it's not asking too much to make sure that people who
are voting are truly eligible voters.

But look, if it's a driver's license issue, we've gone to Motor Voter -- let's
have Photo Voter so, when you register to vote, they take your picture, put it
on a card, and you simply are able to make sure that you're a registered
voter.

That way it doesn't dilute the vote if a lot of people who aren't registered
voters try to fraudulently vote.


 The first problem with our current health care system is that it's upside down. It focuses on intervention. We wait until people are catastrophically ill, and then we spend enormous amounts of money trying to fix them. We need to be putting the money on the preventive side. Prevention is a lot less expensive than is intervention. 

The second thing, there has to be ownership of the individual consumer. As
long as the government, the employer, as long as the doctor is in charge of
your health care, and you have no idea what it costs, and you have no idea
what they're doing, and you don't control it, we're never going to get the
system fixed.

And the third thing that has to happen is that we have portable medical
records so that your health care records go with you. They don't stay with
your doctor. You shouldn't have to ask permission to see the records of your
own body. Those are your own records. They don't belong to anybody else.

And the policies that we can put in place have to start with individuals
buying in, not only on insurance, but buying in on health, their own personal,
to start with.


 One of the tragedies is that our military veterans have kept their promises to us; we have not kept all of our promises to them. 

Many of them have come back to be told to wait in line for their health care,
to be told that mental health would be something that might be rationed out.

That's not acceptable. And, if I were president, I'd like to see us have a
very plainly written, simple-to-understand veterans' bill of rights that would
make sure that every single thing that these veterans have been promised is
delivered. And it's delivered as the first fruits of the federal Treasury
before anyone else gets their nose in the trough, the veterans get their
benefits paid -- not on the basis of a limited budget, but on the basis of
making sure that we keep promises to the people who have kept us free.

That, I believe, will help people want to be a part of the military.


 I think we have some role to play in it, but I guess what disturbs me even more, we have not even addressed the genocide that's going on and the infanticide in our own country with the slaughter of millions of unborn children. 

And we also have extraordinary poverty in this country.

Yes, we ought to be involved. But you know something? There are a lot of
people in America that don't think the only poverty is in Darfur -- understand
there's poverty in the Delta.

There are people who don't have running water, people that don't have access
to medical care and don't have a decent school to go to and you don't have to
go halfway around the world to find it. We've got it right here in this
country.


 I probably dislike the death penalty more than anybody on this stage, but for a very different reason. I've actually had to carry it out, more than any governor in my state's history. I had to carry out the death penalty because that was my job. 

I did it because I believed, after reading every page of every transcript and
everything in that file, it was the only conclusion we could come to. But I
didn't enjoy it.

And God help the American who somehow has this cavalier attitude about the
death penalty and says they support it and they can do it. Let me tell you
something from the person whose name had to be put on the document that
started the process: It's a necessary part of our criminal justice system for
those crimes for which there is no other alternative.

But God help the person who ever does it without a conscience and feels the
pain of it.


 And when I made those statements, I was speaking to the fact that there were times when we gave the world the impression that we were going to ignore what they thought or what they felt, and we were going to do whatever it is we wanted to do. 

And the fact is, we're going to do what is best for the American people. And
as president, I will always act in the best interest of our country.

But I'll always try to make sure that we're the strongest nation on Earth, the
most powerful, the most prepared, but also the one that uses that strength in
a very, very understanding way of making sure that when we use the strength we
use it with full understanding of the implications of it.

Let me just finish the thought, Charlie, if I may.

There were times when the arrogance was reflected, for example, in the former
defense secretary who, despite getting advice from the Defense Department that
we would need 400,000 troops to be able to successfully bring stability to
Iraq, insisted that we would only use 180,000 troops and we would go in with a
light footprint.


 And there was one particular statement that he made that I found especially troubling. He said, "We don't go to war with the army that we want; we go to war with the army that we have." 

I felt that the proper way for us to approach this is we don't go to war with
the army we have, we go to war with the army that we need, and we make sure
that we have what we need before we go to war, including a clear definition of
what we're going to do, irresistible force when we do it, and once we do it,
we don't let the politicians interfere or interrupt the battlefield decisions
of the commanders with blood on their boots and medals on their chest.


 Well, and those words -- first of all, Governor Romney, you, yourself on "60 Minutes" said that we had left Iraq in a mess. You've also said that you weren't going to have this "my way or no way" philosophy. 

And I've been attacked for using the words: a policy that had an arrogance and
bunker mentality. I didn't say the president was. I supported the president in
the war before you did. I supported the surge when you didn't.

I'm not a person who is out there taking cheap shots at the president. I
worked really hard to get him elected.

But I'm not running for George Bush's third term. I want to be president of
the United States on my own terms.

And I think it's important for us to recognize...


 Let me finish this. When Congressman... 

(CROSSTALK)


 The fact is when there is a serious threat to this country, it is not a threat because we happen to be peace-loving people. It's a threat because in the heart of the radical Islamic faith -- not all Islam, and that's what's very important. 

This isn't an Islamic problem. This is a jihadist problem. This is an Islamo-
fascism problem.

And if you read the writings of those who most influenced -- and Governor
Romney mentioned Sayyid Qutb, executed in Egypt in 1966. He is one of the
major philosophers behind this.

And the fact is, there is nothing about our attacking them that prompts this.
They are prompted by the fact they believe that they must establish a
worldwide caliphate that has nothing to do with us other than we live and
breathe and their intention is to destroy us.


 Did you read the article before you commented on it? 


 Before you commented on it? 


 Which one? 

(LAUGHTER)


 Well, it's not a personal attack, Mitt, because you also supported a timed withdrawal. And Senator Pryor from my state... 


 ... was praising you for that, and... 


 Well, Charlie, I think the question the president was asking was not as much about our policies, because those can change with each generation, with each year, with each circumstances, but the principles -- what is it that's deep inside of us, that guide us, that direct us, that show the framework of what we're going to do? 

And I think the simple answer for me is all the way back to the document that
gave us birth.


 And it goes like this: That we hold these truths to be self-evident, that we are endowed by our creator with certain inalienable rights, these being life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, that we are created equal. 

In that sense of equality, the greatest principle is that every human being
and every American is equal to each other. One person is not more equal
because of his net worth or because of his I.Q. or because of his ancestry or
last name.

That was a radical idea when those 56 signers put their names on that
document, knowing that if their experiment in government didn't work, they
were going to die for it.

Those are principles. Those are things that you'll live for, you'll die for.
That sense that all of us have an essence of equality and that the primary
purpose of a government is to recognize that those rights did not come from
government, they came from God, they are to be protected, and then defined as
the right to a life, the right to liberty -- our freedom -- to live our lives
like we want to live them without government telling us how to do it. And
ultimately, not to be happy, but to have the pursuit of happiness. That's our
principles.


 Our policies often reflect what's going on at the time. For example, if the primary thing we are facing is war, then we're going to be talking about military size and military might. If we have a problem with illegal immigration, the number one issue right now might be securing the borders. 

I'm not saying we change our positions, but we change the policies in terms of
the priority, but those principles don't change. The principles are still to
make sure that we recognize the equality of each other and that we recognize
where those rights come from and what those rights are.


 Charlie, I'm... 


 OK. 

I think it's important to realize that the issue is not just insurance. The
issue is that the whole model of our health-care system is upside down.

We really don't have a health-care system. We have a disease- care system. And
the insurance model that we use, we act like that if we insured everybody,
we've fixed it.

We haven't. Because the real problem is that our model, both in the insurance
model and the health-care model, waits until people are catastrophically ill
before it intervenes.


 And we really have to change the concept to a preventive focus rather than an intervention focus. 

And that means the entire system starts working on health and wellness,
because 80 percent of the $2 trillion that we spend on health care goes to
chronic disease.

We could prevent it or we could cure it, but we don't. So it's not an issue of
there's not enough money to cover people.

But if a real health care system exists, it has three components: It has
affordability, it has quality, and it has accessibility.

And if it doesn't have those elements, it's not a system; it's a maze. And
what we have in America is a health care maze. It's built on the idea that we
wait until people are so desperately ill that the cost to try to fix them is
catastrophic and out of control.

And no wonder we have a system that needs major, major attention.

And by the way, just out of due respect, you said $1,000 for a repair.


 It's about $1,000 for a Kleenex at a hospital anymore. 

(LAUGHTER)

And that's why we need to have a totally different system that keeps you from
going to the hospital in the first place.

(CROSSTALK)


 Charlie, that's not at all the way it is. The fact is, if you had... 

(CROSSTALK)


 As Abraham Lincoln said, "If it weren't for the honor of it, I'd just as soon pass," when he was run out of town on a rail. But let me join in on this. 

(LAUGHTER)

The fact is, Americans are upset about this issue because they feel like we've
violated the rule of law. Every one of us I think agree that you have to
secure the border and until that's done, nothing makes sense.

That ought to be done. It ought to be done with American workers, with
American products, and it ought to be done immediately. Eighteen months ought
to be the outside length of time.

If the Empire State Building can be built in 14 months, if some of the great
works of this country can be built in a record period of time, I'm convinced
we can secure our borders.

And I agree with Senator Thompson, it's an issue of national security, more
than it is anything else. But it's a matter of sealing the borders of our
nation in a responsible way.


 I think we ought to have a period of time in which people then return to their home country and get in the back of the line. 

Now, the reason I've come to that conclusion is for a variety of focus, but
here's part of it: When people live in the United States, they ought to have
their head up. They ought to not live in fear. Every time they see a police
car, they shouldn't run and hide. Nobody ought to live like that in this
country.

And the only way we're going to fix that is that people do it right. And in
order to do it right, they're going to have to go back and get in the back of
the line.

It's not an inhumane way; I think it's the only way that makes sense.

And I want to make final point that I think ought to happen: When we say,
"Well, we can't round these people up and take them home," we don't have to,
Charlie.

You give them the option: If you don't do it the right way and then we catch
you, you would be subject to deportation. But if you do it the right way, then
you're going to be able to live with your head up and live free in this
country, properly. And it won't be that we have this huge problem and the
resentment that goes with it.


 And the final reason that's important -- I know you want me to finish, and I'm doing it. 

The reason that we've got to do that is that when people say we can't get a --
we don't have to, for this simple principle: The government didn't escort them
over the border in the first place, so the government doesn't have to take
them back. They got here on their own. And people can go back and start the
process legally, for their benefit and for everyone else's benefit.


 Well, I think there would be substantial differences on the Second Amendment, on the sanctity of life, on the role of government, on the idea of local versus federal government. I'm still a 10th Amendment guy and believe that most of these decisions ought to be left to the states. 


 I think there will also be fundamental differences on taxes, whether they ought to go up or down. I think there would be differences on national defense. I think we ought to have the strongest possible military that nobody else on Earth wants to ever even think about engaging in battle. 

There would be a number of issues that would be fundamentally different.
Probably on same-sex marriage, there would be a difference of opinion between
Senator Obama and me.

I mean, I could go through a whole litany of things that would be dramatically
different. I think, in fact, it would be fair to say that any one of us would
have a very different litany of issues.

But in fairness, since I still have just a little bit of yellow light left, I
think we also ought to recognize that what Senator Obama has done is to touch
at the core of something Americans want.

They are so tired of everything being horizontal -- left, right, liberal,
conservative, Democrat, Republican. They're looking for vertical leadership
that leads up, not down.


 He has excited a lot of voters in this country. Let's pay respect for that. He is a likable person who has excited people about wanting to vote who have not voted in the past. 

And we'd better be careful as a party, because if we don't give people
something to be for, and only something to be against, we're going to lose
that next election, and there are some fundamental issues that we lose with
it.


 Well, I think it is possible to get energy independent, and do it within a decade. We're the same country that built an atomic... 


 I believe we can -- if we want to; if we untax the possibilities of the innovations in technologies; if we also look at the fact that -- put an incentive out there that's just truly something dramatic: a billion-dollar bonus for the first person who can produce a car that can get 100 miles per gallon. 


 In addition to that, look at the alternative forms of energy that we can use. And everybody talked about... 

(CROSSTALK)


 There wouldn't be, no. 


 And I don't believe there should, Fred, because I think we ought to un-tax innovation, un-tax income. 

Anything -- any time you penalize productivity, it's counterintuitive to an
economy. And one of the reasons that we're dependent is because we have
allowed the oil companies to dictate not just prices, but policy.

And it's time to say that we're not going to allow dictators, whether it's the
Middle East or from Venezuela, to continue to in essence enslave the American
people, which is exactly what we've done.

Senator McCain is right. We have an issue now where we're paying for both
sides of the war on terror. We pay for it with our tax dollars to fund the
military, but every time we swipe our credit card in the gas pump, we might as
well be sending a check over to the madrassas that are training the terrorists
that eventually are going to come back to us. And that's why it's got to be an
urgent matter of utmost priority.

 A president had better be open to listening to the generals who are going to lead people into battle and put their lives on the line. That's one of the problems we face now, Chris. We listen to the diplomats; we listen to the civilians; we listen to the people running the Defense Department -- more worried about the budget than worried about the blood that might be spilled by our own kids. 

That's why I think it's critical that if you're going to be commander-in-
chief, you make tough decisions. But you'd better get the best advice that you
possibly can get. And that advice comes from the people who have earned the
right to say to the president, Mr. President, this is what it's going to take
to do the job right.

There's an old saying in the South that I'm sure people in South Carolina are
familiar with. "It takes more money to do it over than it does to do it
right." We're now seeing that in the United States. We're doing a lot of
things over. Maybe we should have just done it right.


 Well, the simplest way is an active fair tax. That's the first thing I'd love to do as president, put a "Going Out of Business" sign on the Internal Revenue Service and stop the $10 billion a year that it costs just for them to operate. 

If we had a fair tax, it would eliminate not just the alternative minimum tax,
personal income tax, corporate tax, it would eliminate all the various taxes
that are hidden in our system, and Americans don't realize what they're
paying.

It wouldn't be a revenue increase or a revenue decrease, revenue neutral. But
it also enables people at the lowest end of the economic spectrum to have a
chance to reach the next rung on the ladder. It's the best proposal that we
ought to have, because it's flatter, it's fairer, it's finite, it's family-
friendly.

And instead what we've done is what Senator McCain has suggested. We've had
Congress that's spent money like Edwards at a beauty shop. (Laughter.) And
it's high time that we have a different kind of tax structure, and the fair
tax would get us there.


 Well, it's a form of flattery to be attacked, but I wish my name would get in the moniker that Governor Gilmore is putting out there. I could use the bump. (Laughter.) 

But the truth is I cut taxes 94 times when I was governor. Yes, we raised
gasoline taxes in my state to build a road program that we desperately needed,
but 80 percent of the people of my state voted for it. Do I apologize for
going along with what 80 percent of the people of my state supported? No. Nor
do I anyway apologize for building roads.

Do I apologize for complying with a Supreme Court order to improve education
in a state that desperately needed it? Of course I don't, because our
education system did improve.

But I don't also apologize for being a Republican governor in a very Democrat
state and getting 94 different tax decreases, the first ever in my state's
history, done. And I think that's a pretty doggone good record.


 He has not. I have great respect for the mayor, and I -- let me tell you why I have great respect. He's been honest about his opinion. He's been honest about his position, and I think that's a healthy thing for our party and for this debate. But I'm pro-life because I believe life begins at conception, and I believe that we should do everything possible to protect that life because it is the centerpiece of what makes us unique as an American people. We value the life of one as if it's the life of all, and that's why we go out for the 12-year-old Boy Scout in North Carolina when he's lost; that's why we look for the 13 miners in Sago, West Virginia, when the mine explodes; that's why we go looking for the hikers in Mount Hood, because we value life, and it's what separates us from the Islamic jihadists who are out to kill us. They celebrate death. They have a culture of death. Ours is a culture of life. 

Now, if something is morally wrong, let's oppose it. The honest argument is I
don't think it's morally wrong, and someone could take that position and then
justify abortion. But if it's wrong, then we ought to be opposed to it, and we
ought to find ways to find better ways to deal with our respect for human
life.


 I wish that he hadn't gotten out in light of what happened in Missouri. It's one of the most horrible things, I think, that I'll look back on, but I didn't let him go. The parole board did. I actually denied his clemency, which was my official action. It was my predecessor who commuted his sentence and made him parole- eligible. It's been used as a political weapon against me. 

Do I regret having said that I thought that he had met the conditions for
parole? I do, in light of what he did.

But I don't have foresight. I have great hindsight, like everybody does.

Here's what I do know. I know that we live in a very dangerous world and we
make tough decisions and we have to live by them. For 10-1/2 years as a
governor, I made tough decisions and saw thousands of cases cross my desk
every day. I wish I could have always made them perfect, but I can't. If I'm
president -- and I hope I will be -- I won't be a perfect president, but I'll
be one who will do my very best to not repeat mistakes or to make them in the
first place.


 One of the things that happened after 9/11, the president told us essentially that we all needed to get back on airplanes and fly, we all needed to go back to shopping centers and shop, we need to go ahead and travel. And I understand what he meant by that -- to put our economy back in motion. And I think that was a good thing to say, but it may have been interpreted by the American people as business as usual. 

The problem is, it'll never ever be business as usual when you attack innocent
Americans on our soil. It can't be business as usual. We've got to make a
different kind of business -- go after those who murdered -- and let's use the
word "murder" -- murdered fellow American citizens, then let's make sure that
we do more than simply protect our borders and bring justice to those who did
it; but that we ask the American people to join together in a sacrifice, the
same kind of sacrifice that we had when we were attacked at Pearl Harbor, the
same kind of sacrifice that we've been called upon as a nation repeatedly to
do.

That's what America would have to do.


 Well, Brit, I was scheduled to be on Jay Leno tonight, but I gave up m slot for somebody else because I'd rather be in New Hampshire with these fine people. (Cheers, applause, laughter.) 

You know, Brit, Fred is -- Fred is from Nashville, Tennessee, home of George
Jones, who is often called "No-Show George" for not showing up at his
concerts. (Laughter.) And maybe Senator Thompson will be known as the no-show
for the presidential debates.

But I'm proud to be sharing the stage with these guys, because we're running
for president, and we're delighted to be here.

And I certainly appreciate getting this opportunity.


 Well, first of all, because I've listened to some of them, and it's not the concern that people are coming here for opportunities or even that they're illegal. 

Look, I want to be very clear. I agree we ought to have sealed borders. People
in this country are essentially good folks. They're not angry at immigrants
who want to come here for the same reason that our ancestors came, but they're
angry at a government that has completely ignored borders and allowed this
problem to fester to the point that it's now overrunning us in a position that
people don't even understand how to fix it.

The reality is that we track packages from UPS and FedEx every time we order
from amazon.com, and yet we've got a government that says we don't what to do
and how to keep up with people. If necessary, we ought to outsource this whole
issue to FedEx and UPS. They seem to have a better way of keeping up with
packages than our government does with people. (Applause.)

But I want to be clear. If someone is looking for a president who is going to
have a mean spirit toward other human beings, I'm not their guy. I'll fix the
borders, I'll secure them, but what I won't do is to do it because I'm angry
at them for wanting to come here for the same reason that the rest of us love
America. (Bell, applause.)


 Wendell, I'm going to let them sort out whatever differences they have. 

I would look to see us have in this country what I helped lead in our state in
Arkansas, and that's a human life amendment to our state constitution,
Amendment 65. It says that we believe life begins at conception and that we
ought to do everything in the world possible to protect it until its natural
conclusion, and that means that we truly value and respect elevate and
celebrate every life.

The reason this country has been extraordinarily interested in what's going on
with those miners out in Utah is because even though we don't know them, they
represent us in the sense that they are human beings, and we don't know their
faith. We need to show the same kind of respect for life whether a child is in
the womb or whether in a coal mine or in a long-term care facility. It's about
the fact that in our culture the greatest testament that we can give is that
we have a(n) undying respect for every human life as having intrinsic worth
and value.


 We have to continue the surge. And let me explain why, Chris. When I was a little kid, if I went into a store with my mother, she had a simple rule for me. If I picked something off the shelf of the store and I broke it, I bought it. 

I learned don't pick something off the shelf I can't afford to buy.

Well, what we did in Iraq, we essentially broke it. It's our responsibility to
do the best we can to try to fix it before we just turn away because something
is at stake. Senator McCain made a great point, and let me make this clear. If
there's anybody on this stage that understands the word honor, I've got to say
Senator McCain understands that word -- (applause, cheers) -- because he has
given his country a sacrifice the rest of us don't even comprehend. (Continued
applause.)

And on this issue, when he says we can't leave until we've left with honor, I
100 percent agree with him because, Congressman, whether or not we should have
gone to Iraq is a discussion that historians can have, but we're there. We
bought it because we broke it. We've got a responsibility to the honor of this
country and to the honor of every man and woman who has served in Iraq and
ever served in our military to not leave them with anything less than the
honor that they deserve. (Cheers, applause.)


 Congressman, we are one nation. We can't be divided. We have to be one nation under God. That means if we make a mistake, we make it as a single country, the United States of America, not the divided states of America. (Cheers.) 


 And that's what we do on the floor of the -- 


 Even if we lose elections, we should not lose our honor, and that is more important to the Republican Party. 


 Thank you. (Laughter, applause.) 


 Well, Chris, the first problem is -- is the Bush tax panel did not look at the fair tax proposal. They looked at something that called itself that, but it was not. The true fair tax proposal is at 23 percent. And what it does do is empower everyone in the economy, not just the people at the bottom and the very top, but all of the middle class, which is a desperate need. 

It's pretty sad right now that the average American is more afraid of an IRS
audit than getting mugged, but that's the truth. And the reason is because the
IRS has the power, not just to come after us for a few seconds but to keep
coming after us.

What we would do with the fair tax is to eliminate all the taxes on
productivity, which means you could earn anything you want. You wouldn't be
penalized for saving, earning, for having a capital gain, making an
investment. What you would do is you'd pay a tax when you consume something,
and it ends the underground economy. Illegals, prostitutes, drug dealers --
everybody has to pay.

And if people would look at this objectively, they'd find that it's the best
way to get rid of the corruption in government, because it eliminates those
35,000 lobbyists out there trying to make winners and losers, and most of us
end up being losers in the process.


 The problem with the question is it's as hypothetical and it's a very detailed question. And I appreciate that you've given it to us, but the reality is when a president is -- 


 What I'm saying is when a president is elected president, he's elected president to make decisions that are going to be basically balanced between two immovable things that ought to govern every decision he makes. One is the Constitution that he's sworn to uphold, and the other is his own conscience and character. 

And that's what people really ask for in a president, because you don't know
all the scenario that may be painted, whether it's this one or some other. And
at that point you hopefully have not only surrounded yourself with very, very
wise people, but you've also come to the conclusion that you don't know
everything, and you get on your knees, and then you get on your feet and you
make decision knowing full well the responsibility for the rest of the human
race may in fact be on your shoulders.

That's why, rather than just say, "Here's what button I would push," I'd say I
would go with every bit of preparation, not only in my head but in my heart,
to make a decision that would best protect the American people for generations
to come.


 Chris, you know Americans better than that. Nothing's going to discourage them from spending money. (Laughter.) Just go to any shopping center on Saturday. You'll find that people aren't having to be begged to go spend money. 

No, the Fair Tax does something that is absolutely phenomenal for the economy.
It untaxes productivity. It untaxes those things which we export.

It means that for the first time in a long time in this country, instead of
exporting our jobs, we'll actually be exporting products that we make in
America. And we'll be able to make sure that there's a level playing field. It
ends the underground economy that right now makes it so that folks like us end
up paying taxes, but drug dealers don't; illegals don't; prostitutes and
pimps, they don't. But we do.

You know, a lot of people are going to be watching this debate. They're going
to hear Republicans on this stage talk about how great the economy is. And
frankly, when they hear that, they're going to probably reach for the dial. I
want to make sure people understand that for many people on this stage the
economy's doing terrifically well, but for a lot of Americans it's not doing
so well. The people who handle the bags and make the beds at our hotels and
serve the food, many of them are having to work two jobs, and that's barely
paying the rent. And you know what else? They don't think that they can afford
for their kids to go to college; they're pretty sure they're not going to be
able to afford health insurance.

And so I hope in the course of this we can talk about a how a fair tax really
lifts up everybody, including those at the bottom of the economic spectrum,
and untaxes the poor people in our culture.


 I think it really matters as to whether or not they're going to be -- there's going to be a fair trade. And the fact is, we don't have fair trade. And that's the issue we've got to address. Can they buy a company? Sure. But our real problem continues to be that an American company is having to pay an extraordinarily high tax on everything they produce, but the countries who are importing to us don't have the same border adjustability that we do. 

And that's why we're losing jobs here, that's why people in Michigan are going
-- looking for something to do, and that's what has to change, and it's not
being changed, and this party is going to have to start addressing it, or
we're going to get our britches beat next year.


 A president has to do whatever is necessary to protect the American people. If we think Iran is building nuclear capacity that could be used against us in any way, including selling some of the nuclear capacity to some other terrorist group, then yes, we have a right to do it. And I would do it in a heartbeat. 


 Well, if it's necessary to get it done because it's actionable right now, yes. If you have the time and the luxury of going to Congress, that's always better. But Chris, the most important single thing is to make sure -- 


 You do what's best for the American people, and you suffer the consequences. But what you don't do is -- what you never do is let the American people one day get hit with a nuclear device because you had politics going on in Washington instead of the protection of the American people first. (Applause.) 


 I think ethanol and all biofuels are going to be an important part of the future energy needs of the country, but the accelerated pace at which we get there is critical for national security as well as for our own economic interest. The fact is, we keep talking about 15-, 20-, 30-year plans -- that's nonsense. If we don't start saying we'll do this within a decade, we're never going to -- ever going to get there, and we need to approach it the same way that a car does at the NASCAR pit stop: You rush in, you get it done because you have to. We're in a race; we're in a race for our lives against people who want to kill us. And a lot of the reasons that we are entangled in the Middle East is because our money buys their oil, that money ends up coming back to us in the way of Islamofascism terrorists. 

We've got to come to the place where everything is on the table -- nuclear,
biofuels, ethanol, wind, solar -- any and every thing this country can
produce. We once had a president who said, "Let's go to the moon in 10 years,"
and we were there in eight. And we did that when we started with a technology
of bottle rockets when we got the thing launched. And we all saw that we can
do it.

But we can't do it when we create this sense of we'll wait until another
generation. We can't wait till another generation. Instead of running it like
NASCAR, we've been running it like taking the family station wagon in for
letting Goobar and Gomer take a look at it when they get time under the shade
tree. (Laughter.) So it's critical that for our own interest economically and
from a point of national security, that we become energy independent and
commit to doing it within a decade.


 The American people have always believed that the American dream was alive for them. Most of us here today, probably every one of us, are living better than we ever dreamed we would when we were kids. 

But when I ask the question, "How many of you think your kids and grandkids
are going to be living better than you," rarely does a hand go up.

A lot of what has to happen is a restoring of the resilience and optimism in
this country, and part of that is making sure that they understand that we
understand we've got big problems that need big ideas, things like a total
overhaul of our tax system, and people who are running this country who grew
up the hard way, with a struggle, who understand what it's like to not be sure
that the next day is going to necessarily be a great and prosperous one.


 The real fact is, unions are going to take a more prominent role in the future for one simple reason: A lot of American workers are finding that their wages continue to get strapped lower and lower while CEO salaries are higher and higher. And the reality is that when you have the average CEO salary 500 times the average worker, and you have the hedge fund manager making 2,200 times that of the average worker, you're going to create a level of discontent that's going to create a huge appetite for unions. 

So unions are the natural result of workers finally saying, "Look, I can't go
from a 70,000 (dollar)-a-year job to a $15,000-a- year job and feed by family
of four." That's when unions are going to come back in roaring form.


 First of all, I really would love to have had one of those minute-and-a-half questions with a 30-second follow-up, but since you're only giving me 30 seconds, let me do the best I can. 


 The president was caught in a tough political battle. The Democrats won the political battle. Unfortunately, the issue wasn't about children; the issue was about political posture. And the reality is you're going to create a huge problem for the Medicare Advantage Plan and shortfall that, and many of the kids who will be covered under the expanded SCHIP are people who already have insurance -- will be coming out of their insurance programs. 

But the president was in a very incredibly tough position because 75 percent
of the American people -- if I were president, I would never let that get to
the point where that's the only option you have. You ought to make sure that
you communicate to the American people --


 I'm sorry? 


 You know, I'm not absolutely certain that that's going to be the right way because there are going to be so many issues we've got to fight, and the political loss of that is going to be enormous. 

And I just believe this. One thing we've got to remember: There's a real
problem in the health care issue where Democrats say they want the government
to control it.

Republicans say, we want private insurance to control it. Some people want the
businesses to control it.

Let me tell you what the real answer is: letting individuals control their
own, and let them own it. (Applause.) That's the real need, because I don't
trust government and I don't trust the insurance companies. I trust me with my
health care.


 Well, as president, that would be one of the first things I'd like to do, since I've spent most of my year on an airline this entire time. (Laughter.) First of all, we've got to have the kind of technology on the ground that we have in the cockpit. We've got Jetsons-level technology that's running the cockpit; we have the Flintstones technology on the ground that's controlling the airplanes. (Laughter.) And it's ridiculous. 

And the second thing, we've got an incredibly archaic method of the controls
where you have incredible traffic coming in to key hubs. I don't want to re-
regulate the industry, but the industry's going to have to start either
getting in the program -- and one thing they've got to stop doing is holding
the passengers hostage on airplanes for hours and hours without any way of
being able to get off those planes. And part of it, I think, is let's make
sure that the consumer gets a voice in what happens. And it's out of control
--


 \-- and it's got to be a priority. 





