 Somehow, I knew you were going to ask me the question about this. 

(LAUGHTER)

The reality is that I support the Second Amendment, as Governor Romney says.

I clearly believe that marriage should be between a man and a woman, although
I did support domestic partnerships and still do, a contractual relationship.

And I believe the best way we can have common ground in this debate that
you're hearing is if we put our emphasis on reducing abortions and increasing
the number of adoptions, which is something that I did as mayor of New York
City.


 But I think ultimately that decision that has to be made is one that government shouldn't make. Ultimately, a woman should make that with her conscience and ultimately with her doctor. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I just noticed the question before, Senator McCain said something—in four Democratic debates, not a single Democratic candidate said the word "Islamic terrorism." Now, that is taking political correctness to extremes. 


 It really is. 

(APPLAUSE)

The reality is that you do not achieve peace through weakness and appeasement.
Weakness and appeasement should not be a policy of the American government. We
should seek a victory in Iraq and in Baghdad, and we should define the
victory.

And I thought the piece by O'Hanlon and Pollack last week in the New York
Times, which, I have to frankly tell you, when I read it in the morning, I
read it twice, and I checked—New York Times? But it was the New York Times. It
was.

(LAUGHTER)

And it said, "We just might win in Iraq."

Now, why we would want to retreat in the face of at least some empirical
evidence that General Petraeus and...


 The reality is that if we can bring stability to Iraq, and we can give them a chance to develop stability, that's what we should be trying to accomplish. This is part of an overall terrorist war against the United States. And that's why I noted Senator McCain's statement about Islamic extreme terrorism. This is part of an overall war against us by the terrorists. It's a battle in that war. America should win that battle. And winning that battle is to have an Iraq that helps us against the Islamic terrorists. 


 The bill had two very unfortunate parts to it. One, it would reduce Medicaid Advantage, which is a very, very successful program that actually does bring about some form of a free-market solution. And second, it would have the really odd effect of moving children who presently have private insurance to becoming wards of the state, basically having them move in the direction of— and I know the Democrats get all upset when you say this, but they're taking us toward socialized medicine. If we want the kind of results they have in England or France or Canada or Cuba, like Michael Moore wants us to do, then we should go in that direction. But that would be a terrible thing to do. What we should do is increase the number of people who have private insurance. In order to do that, we should give them a major tax deduction, $15,000, let them have a health savings account as part of that. They'll have an incentive to own their own health insurance. That's the thing that's wrong with the market here. It is not really good to move this thing in terms of more government control of health care. 

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, I believe that is an option that should remain open. I believe the senator didn't express it the right way. I think the senator, if he could just say it over again, might want to say that we would encourage Musharraf to allow us to do it if we thought he couldn't accomplish it. But the reality is, America cannot take... 


 I didn't say I would go in. I said I wouldn't take the option off the table. 


 I said I would keep that option open. In any event... 


 Well, I would take that action if I thought there was no other way to crush Al Qaida, no other way to crush the Taliban, and no other way to be able to capture bin Laden. I think Pakistan has, unfortunately, not been making the efforts that they should be making. I think we should encourage them to do it, we should put the pressure on them to do it, and we should seek their permission of we ever had to take action there as we were able to get their permission—Undersecretary or Deputy Secretary Armitage was very effective in getting Musharraf's permission for us to act in Afghanistan and Pakistan in 2001 and 2002. 


 George, I think the way you're defining it is incorrect. Democracy is not necessarily immediately going to elections. Democracy is... 


 Well, OK... 


 The way I look at it, democracy also requires the rule of law. It requires stability. It requires people not being afraid they're going to be killed every day when they go out on the street. Democracy's only a theory if you're living in an unstable situation. So sometimes, democracy is the long-term goal, but in order to get there, you have to first build a rule of law, you have to first build respect for human rights, you have to first build... 


 In some cases, maybe going to elections so quickly is a mistake. Maybe the thing to do is to first make sure that you've developed the bedrock— bedrock for democracy. You know, if you're living—I learned this in New York City when I became the mayor. Of course the situation was nowhere near as serious, but people were afraid to go out at night because crime was so rampant. I mean, we had all kinds of civil rights, but nobody could exercise them, because they were too darn afraid to go out, too darn afraid to go to the movies or go buy groceries at the grocery store. First, you have to have a certain quality of life that allows you to be comfortable (inaudible) going to exist, your children are going to go to school, you're going to be able to have a job, and your rights are going to be respected. Then elections start to mean something in the full picture of what a democracy is. 


 David, there's an assumption in your question that is not necessarily correct, sort of the Democratic, liberal assumption: "I need money; I raise taxes." 


 But wait, wait, wait. Let me explain it. 


 The way to do it sometimes is to reduce taxes and raise more money. For example... 

(APPLAUSE) ... I ran the city—I ran a city with 759 bridges; probably the most
used bridges in the nation, some of the most used in the world. I was able to
acquire more money to fund capital programs. I reduced the number of poor
bridges from 5 percent to 1.7 percent. I was able to raise more money to fix
those bridges by lowering taxes. I lowered income taxes by 25 percent. I was
collecting 40 percent more from the lower income tax than from the higher
income tax. Or, I'll give you another example. Senator Edwards last week
recommended increasing the capital gains tax from 15 percent to 28 percent
because he wants more money.


 Now, Senator Edwards hasn't had much executive experience because the reality is the last time—the last time we raised the capital gains tax, and you can go back and check it, from 20 to 28 percent, we lost $45 billion. There is a liberal Democratic assumption that if you raise taxes, you raise money. We should put more money into infrastructure. We should have a good program for doing it. But the kneejerk liberal Democratic reaction—raise taxes to get money—very often is a very big mistake. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I think the vice president of the United States—that office has to be worked out with the president. And the thing that's clearest about it, now that we're at war and we have this Islamic terrorist war against us and we have this aggressive enemy that's already attacked us here in the United States twice, is that a vice president has to be just as capable, just as ready to take over that office, literally on a moment's notice. And that should be the major qualification. And then it should be in the discretion of the president and the vice president to decide on what kind of responsibilities they should have. 


 I worked in the Reagan administration... 


 I thought—I mean, worked in the Reagan administration. I thought the division of responsibilities between President Reagan and Vice President was a good one. I thought it was a really comfortable one. I mean, I'm real clear on the fact that George W. Bush is the president of the United States. 


 He's the only one... 


 ... who makes the decisions. He can use Vice President Cheney the way he sees fit. And I'm comfortable that you select somebody who can step in on a moment's notice with experience, background, knowing what's going on. We can't have a kind of situation like we had in, you know, the 1940s with Harry Truman, where Harry Truman, thank God, turned out to be the kind of president he was, but apparently he didn't even know about the Manhattan Project. You can't have that any longer. 


 Eliminate the death tax. 


 And that should be eliminated immediately. It makes no sense at all. In 2010, the death tax is going to go to zero percent. And then it's going to go to 55 percent in 2011. You do not want to be on a respirator in 2010. 

(LAUGHTER)

(CROSSTALK)


 And then I would say the most—the most sensible thing to do is to simplify the tax code, reduce taxes, keep taxes low. I don't think—I think the flat tax and the fair tax are both very intriguing. And if we were starting off at the very beginning with taxation, the first argument I would make is let's not have any taxes. The second argument I would make is the fair tax or the flat tax would probably be a better way to go. 


 It would be too complex to get there. And somebody would have to show me how we're going to make that transition. And, also, the thought that there wouldn't be an IRS with the fair tax—well, who is going to administer the sales tax? And who's going to administer the people that are exempt from the sales tax? And who is going to administer what items might be exempt from the sales—maybe food would be exempt from the sales tax. 

(APPLAUSE)


 (inaudible) read it—underlined it. 


 We just disagree about it. 

(LAUGHTER)


 To have a description of my mistakes in 30 seconds? 

(LAUGHTER)


 Your father is a priest. I'm going to explain it to your father, not to you, OK? 

(LAUGHTER)


 I would do the same thing that I did as mayor of New York City, and that is, I would restore hope, but for the people of the entire country: hope that this country can do great things, grand things, that we can build our future on optimism, not this kind of defeatism that I hear from the Democratic candidates. And in deference to the senator, I think the senator is a great man and very well-qualified. But the fact is, I look at the three leading Democratic candidates. They haven't held an executive office in their lives. They haven't run a city, a state, a business. I think maybe they've run a club somewhere. But the reality is, you've got to have some kind of experience for this job. You have to be able to show that you can accomplish things and you can get things done. And I've done that, and I would do that for this country. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I can't comment on Fred. I can tell you that George Will wrote a couple of years back, toward the end of my time of being mayor of New York City, that I ran the most conservative government in the United States in the last 50 or 60 years. So I would think that was a pretty good indication of the things that he was drawing on. I brought down crime more than anyone in this country -- maybe in the history of this country -- while I was mayor of New York City. 


 I brought down taxes, $9 billion, cut them 23 times. I balanced the budget that was perennially out of balance; removed $2.3 billion surpluses -- deficits and replaced them with surpluses. 

So there were many -- I drove pornography out of Times Square. There were
many, many things about my governing of New York that particularly in that
environment -- one of the most liberal cities in the country -- I had more
success than anyone ever thought I could have with a city council that was 45
Democrats and, I think it was, six Republicans -- then it went down to five at
one point.


 So I think that was a pretty darn good conservative record. I think, in every case, you can always find one exception or two to someone being absolutely conservative or absolutely this or absolutely that, but I think I had a heck of a lot of conservative results. 


 Well, look, you know... 


 ... well, first of all, you know, you do one of those things and -- you know, Fred has his problems, too. 

(LAUGHTER)

I mean, Fred was the single biggest obstacle to tort reform in the United
States Senate. He stood with Democrats over and over again.

He voted against $250,000 caps on damages, which they have in Texas. He voted
against almost anything that would make our legal system fairer: loser pays
rules, things that would prevent lawsuits like that $54 million lawsuit by
that guy who lost his pants -- you know?

(LAUGHTER)


 That cost that family $100,000 in legal fees. I think the man should have to pay the family for the $100,000 that he took from them in the abusive lawsuit. 

(APPLAUSE)

Fred Thompson, along with very few Republicans, blocked tort reform over and
over and over again. That is not a conservative position.

(APPLAUSE)


 Oh, the simple fact is that New York City had a policy of allowing people who are illegal immigrants to report crime and to put their children in school. Otherwise, we reported every single illegal immigrant that committed a crime. 

The results had to be pretty darn good. I brought down crime by over 60
percent in New York City. I brought down homicide by 67 percent. I had the
most legal city in the country. And I took the crime capital of America and I
turned it into the safest large city in the country.

The senator has never had executive responsibility. He's never had the weight
of people's safety and security on his shoulders.

I have. And I think I out-performed any expectations.

(APPLAUSE)


 I think you said that opposite, and the first part is wrong also, Carl. I have always -- I've always had... 


 I've always had the same position. 


 I do not believe under the state that we presently exist, with the Defense of Marriage Act and basically one state that has by judicial fiat created same-sex marriage -- and they're wrong, by the way; I think the governor is absolutely right -- I don't think we need a constitutional amendment at this point. 

What I said to Mr. Perkins -- which I also said five years ago and have
consistently said -- is if a lot of states start to do that, three, four,
five, six states, where we have that kind of judicial activism, and the kind
of situation the governor is talking about actually occurs, if we're dealing
with a real problem, then we should have a constitutional amendment.

I did 210 weddings when I was mayor of New York City. So I have experience
doing this. They were all men and women.

(LAUGHTER)

I hope.

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)


 You got to give me a little slack here. It was New York City, you know, but... 

(LAUGHTER)


 I couldn't get that. I'm sorry, Wendell. 


 Well, I mean, because what we need is choice. I'll give you a -- probably... 


 Well, I'm actually -- I love teachers. I think teachers are wonderful. There are great ones, there are average ones and there are bad ones, but I really care about the kids more. Sorry, Wendell. 

(APPLAUSE)

And I just want to tell you a little story, because this is the thing that
made me feel very strongly about choice. There was a school scholarship
program about 1996, '97 -- they offered 2,500 scholarships to parents of
public school children in New York City if they wanted to send their child to
a private school, a parochial school, a charter school.


 We had 168,000 applications by those parents. We had to turn most of them down. We had to tell them because they don't have enough money, they couldn't put the child in the school of their choice. 

It seems to me the thing that's wrong right at the core of No Child Left
Behind is the enforcer of standards should not be the bureaucrat in Washington
or on the board of education. It should be the parent. We should have choice.
We should empower parents. They should decide -- private school, parochial
school, public school, charter school, home school.

(APPLAUSE)

That will give the parents the kind of control over their children's
education. They understand their children better. Why should a government
bureaucrat be sending 168,000 children to failing schools when parents think
they can do better for their children? I think it's the single biggest civil
rights issue that we face in the 21st century.

(APPLAUSE)


 You got to be kidding. 

(LAUGHTER)

You have got to be kidding.

Wait a second. There is -- there are two things I agree with Hillary Clinton
on. First of all, we're both Yankee fans.

(LAUGHTER)

Well, wait a second. I became a Yankee fan growing up in New York. She became
a Yankee fan growing up in Chicago.

(LAUGHTER)

Do you believe that?

(LAUGHTER)

Second, she made a statement last week -- and I've been very critical of her,
but I want to tell her I agree with this one. Quote, Hillary Clinton, I have a
million ideas; America cannot afford them all.

(LAUGHTER)

I'm not making it up. I am not making it up.

The transcription contains a gap at this point.

(LAUGHTER) (APPLAUSE)


 Thank you. 

(APPLAUSE)

You saved us in 2000. That was a big one.

(LAUGHTER)

I'd also like to note, on behalf of all my Republican colleagues, we're not
going to boycott Florida the way the Democrats are.

(APPLAUSE)

We're going to be here, campaigning for your vote.


 Was that question for me? 


 OK. I think the reality is that we have to deal with Social Security. 

The first thing we have to do is get a consensus behind private accounts if
we're going to change it.

(APPLAUSE)

It doesn't make much sense to figure out what the compromises are going to be
if you can't get the big thing that you need to really change Social Security.
And the fact is, Medicare and Medicaid and presently more expensive than
Social Security.


 And within 10 years, they'll be twice as expensive. So they're going to go bankrupt a lot faster. And they need a private solution as well. 

What we need to do if we're going to bring down the cost of Medicare and
Medicaid is bring down the cost of the entire health insurance market.

And in the discussion you were having about health insurance before, the point
that I think was missed -- we only have 17 million people in America who buy
their own health insurance. If we have 50 million or 60 million people who
bought their own health insurance, the price of health insurance would be cut
in more than half.

And the way you cover the people that aren't presently covered -- the people
who aren't presently covered with health insurance are not the poorest people;
they're covered with Medicaid.

The people who are presently not covered are all buying something -- they're
consumers. They may be buying a television, they may be buying -- I hate to
mention a cellphone, but they may be buying a cellphone.

But in any event, they have -- they have consumer power. They have to start
getting into that market. It's the only way in which you bring down costs.

So I think in both cases, if you start to establish a private market, you're
going to be able to figure out how to solve these things within costs that are
sustainable.

(APPLAUSE)


 There's no question that the idea of going to war with Iran, or even taking military action against Iran would be very dangerous. It would be something you would not want to do. It would be a last resort. 

But if you're asking me the question, which is more dangerous, a nuclear-armed
Iran is more dangerous.

And it should be the clear position of the United States government that we
will not allow them to become -- to become nuclear.

(APPLAUSE)

And I honestly believe -- and, again, I think this comes from the wisdom of
Ronald Reagan -- if we can be clear about this, and our allies can understand
this, and China and Russia can understand that we would take action to stop
them from becoming nuclear, in our judgment, you know, when that has to
happen, if they thought we were very serious about that, I think the chance of
the sanctions working -- direct, indirect, disinvestment from Iran, I think
the sanctions working would work much more effectively.

China and Russia have, obviously, economic interests in dealing with Iran.
What they have to see is that America would act. And if America acted, that
would be inconsistent with what would be good for them.

You've got to understand, in foreign affairs, just like in the affairs of
people, self-interest is enormously important. You've got to figure out the
other person's self-interest, and then you have to deal with that.

And I think our taking a strong position here would be similar to the
difference between Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter, when he was dealing with
Iran.

(APPLAUSE)

Jimmy Carter had hostages for 444 days. In one hour, the Iranians released the
hostages. And they saw something different in Ronald Reagan's eyes than in
Jimmy Carter's eyes.


 Ernie, that was a very good question. And the reality is that New York City was not a sanctuary city. (OFF-MIKE) single illegal immigrant that New York City could find that either committed a crime or was suspected of a crime. That was in the executive order originally done by Ed Koch, continued by David Dinkins and then done by me.

The reason for the confusion is, there were three areas in which New York City
made an exception. New York City allowed the children of illegal immigrants to
go to school. If we didn't allow the children of illegal immigrants to go to
school, we would have had 70,000 children on the streets at a time in which
New York City was going through a massive crime wave, averaging 2,000 murders
a year, 10,000 felonies a week.

The other two exceptions related to care -- emergency care in the hospital and
being able to report crimes. If we didn't allow illegals to report crimes, a
lot of criminals would have gone free because they're the ones who had the
information.

But, most important point is, we reported thousands and thousands and
thousands of names of illegal immigrants who committed crimes to the
immigration service. They did not deport them. And what we did, the policies
that we had, were necessary because the federal policies weren't working.

The federal policies weren't working, stopping people coming into the United
States. If I were president of the United States, I could do something about
that by deploying a fence, by deploying a virtual fence, by having a
BorderStat system like my COMSTAT system that brought down crime in New York,
and just stopping people from coming in, and then having a tamper-proof ID
card.


 It's unfortunate, but Mitt generally criticizes people in a situation in which he's had far the -- worst record.

For example, in his case, there were six sanctuary cities. He did nothing
about them.

There was even a sanctuary mansion. At his own home, illegal immigrants were
being employed, not being turned into anybody or by anyone. And then when he
deputized the police, he did it two weeks before he was going to leave office,
and they never even seemed to catch the illegal immigrants that were working
at his mansion. So I would say he had sanctuary mansion, not just sanctuary
city.


 No ...


 You did have illegal immigrants working at your mansion, didn't you?


 What I'm suggesting is, if you ...

(Crosstalk)


 If you're going to take this holier than thou attitude, that your whole approach to immigration...


 If you're going to take this holier than thou attitude that you are perfect on immigration...


 ... it just happens you have a special immigration problem that nobody else up here has. You were employing illegal immigrants. That is a pretty serious thing. They were under your nose.

(Applause)

And ...


 And it's really hard -- it's really hard to have employer sanctions...

(Audience booing)


 New York City was not a sanctuary city. New York City did three exceptions. The three exceptions were to allow children to go to school, to allow those illegal immigrants who were the victims of crime to report the person who assaulted them, beat them up, mugged them.

And third, to allow emergency care in the hospitals, which we were required to
do by federal law. We had a policy of reporting every single illegal immigrant
other than those three who commit any kind of crime or were suspected of
crime, and we reported thousands of them to immigration service. Few of them
were deported.


 I think you have to across-the-board spending cuts the way Ronald Reagan did, a 5, 10 percent per civilian agency should be done right now, actually. President Bush should do it to strengthen the dollar. We should commit not to rehire half of the civilian employees that will retire in the next 10 years. That is 42 percent of the federal workforce that will retire in the next 10 years. Don't rehire half of them. Use technology, one person doing the job of two or three.

Every businses has done it. The government has to do it. And we should look at
those programs. There are about 3 percent of programs that OMB finds every
year are failing. They should be zeroed out. Twenty-two pecent are found to be
not able to be evaluated. They should be looked at. We need that kind of
approach.


 Yes, I would. I did it as mayor. I would do it as the president. I had one of the best records in the country for lowering taxes while I was mayor. I expect to have a great record as president.


 The governor's right. It isn't a level playing field. The subsidies in Europe are far higher than they are in the United States. We could reduce subsidies here if they would do it there. But we shouldn't do it on our own.

And also, we have to be very aware of the fact that we have to have our own
supply of food. We can't be dependent on foreign countries for our food.

So, both of those reasons would say that although simplistically, it might
seem like you'd want to get rid of all the subsidies, you've got to do this
very carefully, and you have to do it in concert with these free-trade
agreements and other agreements you're making so that European countries
reduce their much heavier subsidies.


 First of all, it's not true. I had 24-hour security for the eight years that I was mayor. They followed me everyplace I went. It was because there were, you know, threats, threats that I don't generally talk about. Some have become public recently; most of them haven't.

And they took care of me, and they put in their records, and they handled them
in the way they handled them. I had nothing to do with the handling of their
records, and they were handled, as far as I know, perfectly appropriately.


 Andrew, what I believe is that we have to be very aggressive about enforcing the gun laws that exist. I had a city in which, when I took over, there were 2,000 murders a year, 10,000 felonies a week. And I enforced the gun laws very aggressively.

I enforced all laws very aggressively. And that's the reason we reduced
shootings by 74 percent. We reduced homicide by 67 percent. And we went from
being one of the most dangerous cities in the country to being one of the
safest.

As far as that's concerned, what I believe is, the Second Amendment gives
people an individual right to keep and to bear arms. Government can impose
reasonable regulations. Generally, those reasonable regulations would be
about...

(Audience booing)


 Let me finish. Generally, those reasonable regulations would be about criminal background, background of mental instability, basically the ones that are outlined in the opinion of the judge who wrote the Parker decision, Judge Silverman. And if those regulations go beyond that, then those are unconstitutional.

I think states can have a little bit of leeway. New York could have a somewhat
stricter rule than, let's say, Kentucky. Texas might have different rules than
Ohio. But generally, you've got to comply with this rule.

Now, the Supreme Court's going to decide this. The Supreme Court's going to
decide this, probably within the next six months. The Parker (ph) case has
been taken to the Supreme Court. They're going to decide whether it's a right
that pertains to the militia -- which I don't believe it is -- or is it a
right that is a personal right. I believe that it is.

And I will live by that. And people will be allowed to have guns. I'm not
going to interfere with that. Generally, decisions are going to be made on a
state basis. And they're going to have to comply with the Constitution.


 I agree with the senator that it didn't make it a safer city. And some of these gun laws do not make a city a safer city.

The things we did in New York, indisputably, made New York City a much safer
city. And the law in the District of Columbia and the law in New York are
different.

The law in the District of Columbia made it impossible for you to have a
firearm. And if New York City went that far, it should also be declared
unconstitutional.

The Second Amendment clearly gives you the right to carry and to bear arms. In
my reading of it, it's an individual right, and I believe the Supreme Court
will declare that. And that protection comes from the Constitution, not just a
president.


 The governor has a mixed record in fighting crime. For example, murder went up by 7.5 percent. Burglary went up. One other category of violent crime went up. Some categories of violent crime went down. So, it would be fair to say it's a mixed record.

The reality is, I had a very strong record in doing precisely what the young
man was asking about. And that is reducing crime in specifically neighborhoods
that would be regarded as poor neighborhoods, the neighborhoods that had the
most crime.

For example, in Harlem, we reduced crime by about 80 percent. We reduced
shootings, overall in the city, by 74 percent.

The city of New York was one of the most dangerous cities in America, and
particularly in the neighborhoods this young man is worried about, they were
really dangerous.

They are not that way anymore and we made the changes with the CompStat
program, the broken windows theory and with very, very good leadership.


 If Congress passed a ban on all abortions throughout the United States?


 I probably would not sign it. I would leave it to the states to make that decision.

(Applause)

I think that that -- the problem with Roe against Wade is that it took the
decision away from the states. If Roe against Wade were overturned because it
was poorly decided, if the justices decide that, it would them go back to the
states, and it would seem to me that that would be the answer.

The answer is that each state would make a different decision. I don't
believe, in the circumstance that you asked before, that it should be
criminalized. I think that would be a mistake unless we're talking about
partial birth abortion or late-term abortion.

I think you should have parental consent. I think we should have access to
adoptions instead of abortion. But, ultimately, I think these decisions should
be made on a state-by-state basis.


 Wait a second, you're the minister. You're going to help me out on this one.


 OK. The reality is, I believe it, but I don't believe it's necessarily literally true in every single respect. 
 I think there are parts of the Bible that are interpretive. I think there are parts of the Bible that are allegorical. I think there are parts of the Bible that are meant to be interpreted in a modern context.

So, yes, I believe it. I think it's the great book ever written. I read it
frequently. I read it very frequently when I've gone through the bigger crises
in my life, and I find great wisdom in it, and it does define to a very large
extent my faith. But I don't believe every single thing in the literal sense
of Jonah being in the belly of the whale, or, you know, there are some things
in it that I think were put there as allegorical.


 Well, the most important thing to do is to make certain we remain on offense against Islamic terrorism.

(Applause)

And then make it clear that what that means is this is a small group of
people, Islamic terrorists, who have defiled a great religion, that the vast
majority of people who are Islamic, the vast majority of people who are Arabs,
the vast majority of people living in these countries are good people. We
should be trading with them. We should have contact with them. We should
expand our contacts with them. We should have cultural exchanges with them.

The night of September 11th, 2001, when we were beginning to recover -- or,
not really recover, but maybe just first catch our breath after the attack of
September 11th, you'll see one of the first things I said was I said to the
people of my city and then probably to the people of America that we should
not engage in group blame.

We shouldn't do the thing that we're being attacked for. We shouldn't blame an
entire group of people for the horrible acts of a few people who have
distorted a great religion. They have turned it into an ideology of hatred and
an ideology of violence.

By the same token, we can't do what the Democrats do. We can't put our head in
the sand. You've got a Democratic debate and not a single one of those
Democratic candidates used the word "Islamic terrorism." I don't know who they
think they're offending. The people they're offending are the people we want
to offend -- the Islamic terrorists ...

(Applause)

... and not decent people like Yasmin. We are intelligent enough and good
enough as Americans to make this distinction.


 Sam, what I say is, I would like people to look at my whole record. Long before September 11, 2001, I was the third-ranking official in the Reagan justice department.

During that period of time, I actually did something about illegal
immigration. I played a large part in stopping the Haitian illegal immigration
into south Florida. I negotiated the agreement with the Haitian government
that allowed us to put a Coast Guard cutter in the waters outside Port-au-
Prince, as well as the legal agreements that were necessary to do the
examinations there.

And this terrible problem that was going on that was also leading to the loss
of life was ended, or at least ameliorated tremendously.

I was United States attorney in the Southern District of New York. I
prosecuted thousands of organized crimes figures. I prosecuted Sicilian Mafia
members, never done before in an American court.

I was mayor of a city that was described as one of the greatest turnarounds of
any city in the history of America. George Will said I ran the most
conservative government in this country, most successful conservative
government in this country in the last 50 or 60 years. This is all before
September 11th, 2001. I reduced taxes. I reduced spending. I reduced welfare.
I reduced abortions, increased adoptions.

These are all things that I did before September 11, 2001. And the reason that
I believe I'm qualified to be president of the United States is not because of
September 11th, 2001. It's because I've been tested. I've been tested in a way
in which I ran the third-largest government in this country, the 17th-largest
economy in the world, and I got very, very remarkable results.

And that is the evaluation of other people, not me.


 Well, I faced a situation like this, a microcosm of it in New York City. New York City hadn't invested in infrastructure for a very, long time. I had kind of gotten through its fiscal crisis that way. We started a long-term capital investment program on the infrastructure. My predecessor started it. I continued it. I turned it over to my successor and it really has done I think remarkable work in rebuilding the infrastructure of New York. That's what America needs.

It can't be done by one president. This is something where you're going to
need a succession of presidents to have a sustained program. Probably we
should have budgeting that allows for -- we can't really have a capital budget
under federal budgeting, but we could have a separate accounting.

So that kind of budgeting is long-term, because this is going to help America
over a 20- or a 30-year period. Most of the time when we're spending money, as
Senator Thompson said, we're spending the next generation's money and we
shouldn't be doing that. Fiscal conservatism is about preventing that.

But when we're rebuilding our roads, rebuilding our bridges, building new
bridges, rebuilding our infrastructure, that's actually going to benefit the
next generation and the generation after. And there are ways to spread that
out over a long period of time.

But it needs a sustained program, and it cannot be done just by the federal
government. It needs to be done as a partnership with state and local
governments. And I believe I'd be in a good position to lead that.


 Anderson, may I please respond...


 ... to the little side shot?


 The reality is that the line-item veto is unconstitutional.


 The line-item veto is unconstitutional.


 If you are a strict -- the line-item veto is unconstitutional determined not by John McCain, but by the Supreme Court. And the Supreme Court found that the line-item veto is unconstitutional.

If I hadn't challenged that, I would not have been carrying out my fiduciary
duties for the people of New York City. That was money that was illegally
deprived to the people of my city. I fought for them and beat Bill Clinton.
Not bad to have a Republican who can beat Bill Clinton.

(Applause)


 Hey, Krul. Hey, Krul. I'm Giuliani. He's Krul. So I'll explain it to him like in Brooklyn.

I'm an American -- I'm an American League fan. I root for the American League
team when they get into the World Series. I've done it for 50 years. I
actually rooted for the Red Sox...

(Audience member booing)


 Can't help it. I'm an American League fan. I rooted for the White Sox, the Tigers, the Red Sox.

As soon as the World Series are over, I rooted for the Yankees again. We're
gonna beat you next year.

(Applause)

I unfortunately have lost a bet already, to John McCain, with the Arizona
Diamondbacks, so I don't have a 100 record. But I do point out that when I was
mayor of New York City, the Yankees won four world championships.

(Applause)

And -- wait, wait, wait.

I wanted to put this -- I wanted to put this in our reel, but they cut it out,
so I'm going to get it in -- and since I've left being mayor of New York City,
the Yankees have won none.

(Laughter)


 I believe that it's a major problem, and it's one that hasn't been addressed the way it should be over the course of the last seven, eight, maybe really twenty years, and there are three major things we have to do. First, we have to reduce government spending, and we have to be very disciplined about that. And we have to do it by imposing spending caps on spending agencies in government, 5, 10, maybe 15 percent. We have to say we're not going to rehire half of the civilian employees coming up for retirement. Forty-two percent are coming up over the course of the next eight to ten years. They should not be rehired. That would give us a $20 billion, $22 billion reduction. The other would even be higher. And then we have to reduce taxes. Right now we should reduce the corporate tax to 25%. We should reduce it from 35% to 25%. It'd be a major boost in revenues for the government. Most importantly, it would be a way of dealing with our fiscal policy in the same way the Fed is dealing with our monetary policy to create more liquidity. And there are other taxes we should get rid of. We should get ride of the death tax and a whole group of others, but the first one should be the corporate tax.


 I wouldn't call it national security. I'd call it economic security. It's very, very important. I think that Islamic terrorism is national security. Economic security is also important.


 I think the most important thing is the federal government has to restrain its spending. That's the area in which we're hurting ourselves and in which we're creating this problem, national security, economic security, however you define it. The problem is not the American people. What we should be doing is restraining the amount of money that Washington spends in a concerted way with major reductions in civilian spending, using attrition, and returning – actually leaving more money in the pockets of the American people. The strength of America is not its central government. The strength of America are its people. Restrain the central government, give people more choice, more money to spend, we're going to see our economy booming. That's the kind of future where we can have unlimited dreams.


 That would require them trying to figure out other ways to do it. Rather than moving in the direction of more people on government medicine, I'd rather see us reduce the income tax burden, create an exemption for health care, so people can buy their own health care. So, that's going to require they take a little more time, take a little more ownership of their health care. But rather than relying on government as the nanny government, let's rely on people to make choices about their health care. Let's rely on instead of 17 million people buying their own health insurance, 50, 60, 70 million. You'll see the price come all the way down, and you'll see the quality come up. That's an American solution. It's a bold one but it's the kind of thing America's done in the past. We rely on our people, not on our government.


 A flatter tax is simply a tax that you can file on one page. As an option, it would be a good idea. Reducing the corporate tax, as I suggested, reducing the corporate tax across the board, which would mostly benefit the middle class, that's where the focus should be. But we've got to reduce taxes across the board, and we should give the death penalty to the death tax. That really is a very unfair tax.


 I think the main thing is it should be enforced, and the reality is NAFTA's been a good thing. I was concerned about NAFTA, and I became convinced watching it that it's actually helped us. Our percentage of exports, percentage of GDP has gone up dramatically from something like 9 percent to 11 percent. It's brought more jobs to America. America should think about free trade, global economy as something we want to embrace. This is what we've always wanted. America is a country of entrepreneurs and dreamers and creators, and what we should be thinking about is how much can we sell to these people. As they're coming out of poverty, 20 million, 30 million people in India, China, these are new customers for the United States of America. Then we have to make sure that we have a level playing field. That's very important, but we shouldn't lose the goal of free trade. We're big dreamers here in this country. We've got plenty we can sell all over the world that will make up for what we're buying.


 I agree with John. Climate change is real. It's happening. I believe human beings are contributing to it. I think the best way to deal with it is through energy independence, and I think energy independence ..

That I agree with.


 And I think our party –

You're getting closer.

Can you give us each a chance?


 And I think our party should embrace this as an issue for us.


 I'm here because of the educational choices my parents made, or I wouldn't be here or have achieved anything that I've achieved. And that's the place where the decision should be made. Instead of having these education standards done in Washington by the education department or bureaucrats in a state capital or on a board, the choice should be made by parents. Parents should choose the school their child goes to the same way people choose higher education. Has it ever occurred to us that higher education is still the very, very best in the world, and you're asking me about K-12? Well, higher education is based on choice. It's based on a large consumer market. It's based on competition. It's the area of K-12 where we have this government command sort of approach. And if we give the choice to parents where they can choose a private school, a parochial school, a public school, a charter school, home schooling, let them be the decider. I think we'll see a big revolution in education.


 We can make sure the country is secure against Islamic terrorism and on the road to winning the war against Islamic terrorists. We could end illegal immigration by beginning a border stat system. It might take two or three years, but we could begin it. We could do a major tax reduction, the ones that I indicated earlier, to stimulate the economy. I would immediately begin to reduce the size of the federal government the way I did when I was Mayor of New York, and I would move toward energy independence as a goal similar to putting a man on the moon, the Manhattan project. You can use a lot of ways to describe the nature of it, but I would make sure that we accomplish energy independence. You would do things that we hadn't done before and that we previously thought were impossible. You need bold leadership to accomplish that, and I think I can do that. 


 I've been tested by having to provide leadership through crisis, through difficult crises, not just September 11 but in my time as United States Attorney, Associate Attorney General, Mayor of New York City. And America needs bold leadership. We have big problems. We have problems that we haven't faced in the past and solved, problems about how to deal with terrorism effectively, problems about our border, problems about our economic security that we've talked about. And to do that we need bold leadership. We need the kind of ideas that I've put forward in the 12 commitments to the American people. But most importantly, we need an optimistic leader who can bring us these kinds of solutions. I've gotten results in the past. I would like the opportunity to do that for my country.


 I would do this as president. When I was Mayor of New York, I would go get people's opinions. I'd walk the streets, I'd sit down at a restaurant, I'd ask people what they think. I'd go on radio, do a call-in show. I did 96 town hall meetings all with the purpose of hearing what people had to say. Maybe – even with multiple sources of advice within government, maybe if you don't' hear from the people every once in a while, you get a wrong perspective.


 Well, the reality is that all –


 The reality is that all that information was available and known to people, known six years ago. And I would make sure that government was transparent. My government in New York City was so transparent that they knew every single thing I did almost every time I did it. So, I would be extremely – I would be extremely open.

(Laughter)


 I'm used to it. I'm used to being analyzed. I haven't had a perfect life. I wish I had. And I do the best that I can to learn from my mistakes. But as far as open, transparent government, I think I've had both an open, transparent government and an open, transparent life, and it allows you to lead with honesty and truth.


 No, the reality is that this was a bookkeeping practice. The way it was done actually made it more available to freedom of information act requests. Had it been done just in the police department, nobody would have ever found it. Everything that was laid out a few weeks ago had been laid out six years ago. Very well known. Some of the things that I wish if I had led a perfect life would have happened differently, but it was all well known. On the issue of transparency, I can't think of a public figure that's had a more transparent life than I've had.


 I think I've explained my position on abortion, which is that I oppose it, but I believe that ultimately the government should leave that decision to a woman and her conscience. I would like to see limitations on abortion. I've brought those about in New York City. We reduced abortions. We increased adoptions by 135%. But ultimately, it's a position that I thought out a long time ago. For me it's a position of conscience, and it's a position that, in spite of the fact that Alan wouldn't vote for me, I'm not going to change.

(Laughter)

(Applause)


 I would resolve to all of us to take a look at better America and realize how lucky we are, how fortunate we have, not to have this pessimistic feeling that some have abroad in this land. America has accomplished great things. We've faced crises like this before.


 We've always overcome them. A sense of optimism is the thing I would wish for.


 Not at all. I actually recommended 64 tax cuts and accomplished 23 of them. Eighteen of them were the ones I originally proposed, and the balance were ones that I accepted and comprised. So that makes up the 23.

Specifically -- and you can go look - -I lowered the income tax rate by 24
percent from the day I got in until the day I got out. The 24 percent lower
income tax was yielding 42 percent more revenues. So I just talk about supply
side, I actually made it work. I lowered the hotel occupancy tax by 34
percent, and we were making $200 million more on the lower tax than on the
higher tax. I lowered the sales tax.

The overall tax burden on New Yorkers were reduced by 17 percent by the time I
left office. It was the largest tax cut ever done in the history of the city,
it was the largest tax cut done in government, anywhere, in the 1990s,
including all city, all state, all at the federal level, because the federal
level raised taxes during that period.

It led George Will to write a column saying that I ran the most conservative
government in the United States over the last 50 to 60 years, mainly because
of the aggressive tax-cutting that I did. And I am a supply sider.

I believe if you need more revenue, one of the first things you go look to is
an anti-competitive tax. Right now, if we reduced the corporate tax, which is
the second highest in the world, 35 percent, if we reduced it to 30 or to 25
percent, we would make more money. And the Bush tax cuts did the same thing.

The Bush tax cuts are now yielding the United States government more money
than we were getting when we had the higher tax. So, everyone has their record
to look to, we have all different pluses and minuses, but from the point of
view of being a tax-cutter, I had the best record of anyone in government in
the 1990s in cutting taxes.


 Well, actually, what I wanted to do is say to you that I've probably had the most experience of anyone at this table at helping to bring people out of poverty. 


 I took over a city that had 1.1 million people on welfare. I left behind a city with 670,000 fewer people on welfare. I took over a city that had 10.5 percent unemployment. I left behind a city with less than five percent unemployment and I instituted a work fair program.

As Republicans, we don't do well, including me, all of us. We do not explain
to the poor that our programs, our policies are the ladders out of poverty,
that they are being denied, by a lot of the Democratic programs, a good job, a
good education, the work ethic.

So what I did with welfare immediately upon coming into office is I tied
welfare to work for anybody who can work. It was called work fair. It was very
controversial. People were very angry at me. The ACLU, I think, sued me, I
don't remember. They sued me a lot. I can't remember all the times they sued
me.

But I stood up and we fought the battle and we ended up with 670,000 fewer
people on welfare, hundreds of thousands of people on welfare working, by
allowing the basic principles that work in America of work, good education
operate in the lives of poor people.

And as Republicans, we need to go into the neighborhoods where there's poverty
and explain how our programs work. I would go into the neighborhoods where I
was being castigated for work fair and I would say to them, "I'm doing work
fair because I love you more. I care about you more. I care about you more
than just being a statistic. I believe that if I can get you a job, I will
keep you out of poverty and I will keep you with the dignity to be able to
take care of your family."


 It depends on how you're going to change. You can have change for good, change for bad.

Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, John Edwards, when they talk about change,
they're talking about raising taxes. And if you think that's a good change,
well, that's the direction you want to go in. I think the good change is
lowering taxes.

If the Democrats want to pull out of Iraq, without, I believe, really
evaluating the consequences of that and what that might mean, in terms of the
overall Islamic terrorist war against us.

So change, it's really a question of: What direction are you going to change
the country in? Are you going to make us stronger?


 OK. Thank you.


 Sure. My -- my being of mayor of New York City encompassed a lot more than just September 11, 2001.

For eight years, I had the safety and security of millions of people on my
shoulders that I had to deal with, that I had to make decisions about. It's
considered the second toughest job in the United States, and I had it under
very difficult circumstances.

So, the first time being a crisis manager was not September 11, but of course,
I am the only one here who actually has had to face an Islamic terrorist
attack, right at the center of it, had to make decisions, had to make
decisions immediately about how to deal with it. And it gives a pretty good
indication that I have the leadership ability to handle whatever terrorists
may be throwing at us in the future.

And also, with regard to foreign policy, I've negotiated with governments when
I was in the Justice Department. I negotiated agreements on illegal
immigration, I negotiated agreements on the movement of prisoners.

I worked on a task force on terrorism back in the Ford administration in the
1970s. Some of my knowledge of terrorism goes back almost to the very
beginning of when it started.

In the Justice Department, I handled cases involving mostly organized crime
and white collar crime, but also involving terrorism. I was in contact with
governments all over the world in that regard.

I have also traveled 91 trips in the last six years, at 35 different
countries. And when I had to take a stand for my country, I knew how to take a
stand for my country.

I kept Arafat out of the U.N. 50 celebration. I threw him out of the U.N. 50
celebration.

I kept Castro out of -- I kept Castro out of that celebration. And when a
Saudi prince handed me a $10 million check and wanted me to use it as a
criticism of American foreign policy, I handed that check back to him and told
him what to do with it, because I understand the critical issues on which you
have to stand up for your country.

And as the mayor of New York I have been involved in one way or another in
just about every single foreign policy issue because it just happens to be
part of the DNA of New York, that you're involved with the policy with the
U.N. there.


 Well, but the problem in New York City was I had 400,000 illegal immigrants. The federal government could deport no more than 2,000 a year. I had to deal with them in a humane, decent and sensible way. And I did.

I let them go to school, I let them report crime, and I let them go to
hospitals to get treatment, which were humane, decent things to do. My
predecessor mayors had done the same thing, and I'm very proud that we did
that.

We also turned over every criminal to the immigration service to have them
thrown out of the city, thrown out of the country. And the immigration service
couldn't throw out even, you know, a percentage of the numbers we would turn
over to them.

Every single one of us sitting here, including Ronald Reagan, has made
mistakes in this illegal immigration area because this is very complicated and
very difficult. The most important thing is, who has the best plan to fix it
right now?

I believe I have the best plan to fix it right now. It is a plan to put a
fence, technological, as well as physical, to warn the Border Patrol of people
approaching the border, to use a border stat system to stop them from coming
in, in the first place. We can only stop this at the border.

And then to set up a tamper-proof I.D. card that everyone would have to get.
There should be a rule about coming into the United States.

The rule should be like this: you have to identify yourself if you want to
come into the United States. Every other country has this rule. We should have
that rule.

If you get your tamper-proof I.D. card, you can come in, you can work. You pay
taxes. If you want to become a citizen, you get on line, you don't get
preference over anyone else. And at the end of the line, you're going to have
to be able to read English, write English and speak English.

It would take four or five years to accomplish this. It needs to be a
comprehensive solution, but it needs to begin -- and I think this is the
lesson we all learned this year, John and all of us learned going around the
country. It has to begin by securing the borders with the fence, technological
border patrol, border stat system.

We can do this. We can stop people from coming and teach them to come in the
right way.

And we're not doing any favors for the illegals who come in here and work in a
surreptitious way. It is a horrible life, it's a difficult life. If we can
make this change, this country will be a much better country and we will
preserve all the wonderful things about immigration, which is one of the
things that's made us so great.


 Both of those issues I think have been answered. The second one was answered in the "New York Times" on page 37, and the "New York Time" pointed out that all of those expenses were paid for by the police department. They were all appropriate.

I'm glad that they were answered and answered appropriately. I wish they
hadn't been on page 37. And with regard to Bernie Kerik, I explained it was a
mistake. I should have cleared him more carefully three years ago when I
recommended him to the president. That was my mistake.

But I've also appointed thousands of people. It has to be that I mostly make
the right judgment about people because of the results that I've gotten, as a
United States attorney, results against organized crime, as a mayor, results
against crime, bringing down welfare, increasing the economy of the city,
turning the city into a place of great hope, when it had been a place of
hopelessness.

Look, all of us have pros and cons on our record. What America is looking for
is not a perfect person. America is looking for a leader, someone who can give
the United States hope, someone that can give the United States optimism,
someone that can return to our people more of the sense of their ability to
take control of their lives by making more choices about their children,
making more choices about their health care. That's how we energize the spirit
of America.

Every single candidate, you go through every single record here, every single
candidate, you're going to find that they have at certain points made mistakes
along the way. If they haven't, they've probably never done anything.

In my case, I've done a lot of things. I've made my share of mistakes. When I
do, I own up to them, I learn from them and I don't make them again.


 Absolutely.


 It has nothing to do with me. It's been gone over and over and over again. The only way it connects to me is I should have looked into him more carefully when I recommended him. I should have done a better job of vetting him. That was my mistake. I take full responsibility for that. I apologized to the president for it, and it will not happen again.


 … more carefully when I recommended him. I should have done a better job of vetting him.

That was my mistake. I take full responsibility for that. I apologized to the
president for it, and it will not happen again.


 Because over the course of my career I have had to take on very big challenges, very big crises. I have been tested. I have been tested by having to deal with these problems, and I have been able to get results that other people weren't able to get.

In many situations, it turned out to be where bipartisan compromise had to be
worked out. I was mayor of a city that was 5-1 Democratic. In order to
accomplish anything, I had to figure out how to work with Democrats, how to
get things done, how to work with Independents, and we got many, many things
done.

We reduced taxes, we reduced crime dramatically. We reduced the size of
government. And most importantly, we took over a city where people were
hopeless and we left with a city where people felt the city was moving in the
right direction.

Right now there are people in this country -- it concerns me greatly -- who
believe that this country is moving in the wrong direction. It is not.

This country is not moving in the wrong direction. It's a question of
leadership. It's a question of optimism and perspective.

We need to tackle big problems. And that's what I am good at. We need to
provide energy independence. We have to deal with health care. And we have to
remain on offense in the Islamic terrorist war against us.

I believe I have been tested. I believe I am ready. And I believe this is the
time for the kind of leadership that I can bring to this country.


 Well, the reality is that some tax cuts do add to revenues. Other tax cuts don't add to revenues. It depends on the tax cut. And tax cutting has been part of the Bush program, the Reagan program, the Kennedy program, and it always led to significant increase in economic activity. 

The Club for Growth looked at our plan, which is the biggest tax cut in
history, and said that it would be a significant improvement in the economy
and it would add to growth in the economy. Now, let me give you an example.

If you cut something like the corporate tax at 35 percent, you bring it down
to 30 percent, you will get more revenues from that cut, because our corporate
tax is the second highest in the world. If you cut some other tax, you might
not get those kinds of revenues.

So, the question is: What tax are you cutting? Is it anti- competitive? If it
is anti-competitive, you're actually going to get more revenues from that tax
cut. But that's not the only answer to how you deal with a possible recession.

You also have to cut spending as significantly as you cut taxes. You have to
be willing to impose cutbacks on each one of the federal agencies, the
civilian agencies. I would do that the way I did as mayor of New York City,
the way Ronald Reagan did it as president of the United States.

You have to be willing to engage in regulatory reform so that we have a
picture here in the United States where we're not regulating businesses out of
the country. The main things you have to guard against are overtaxing,
overspending, overregulating and over-suing. And if you can find balance
there, you will do things that are necessary to prop up the economy and to
allow us to have a growth economy.

It's not just one thing.


 Yes? 


 Well, first of all, the reason Ronald Reagan was elected in 1980 was because Ronald Reagan was seen as the strongest leader in comparison to Jimmy Carter. And Ronald Reagan ran a 50- state campaign. Of course, it was built around peace through strength, which meant a strong military. And it was built around empowering people, which is why he lowered taxes. He didn't lower taxes just for the purpose of lowering taxes, he lowered taxes because he wanted to leave money in people's pockets because he felt that people spending money creatively is much better than government trying to direct the spending of money. 

I worked for Ronald Reagan. Ronald Reagan appointed me Associate Attorney
General of the United States. He appointed me United States attorney in the
southern district of New York. And we're in different times. Ronald Reagan's
principles would apply now, but they have to apply to different circumstances.

I'm a conservative because I believe in a strong national defense, the way
Ronald Reagan did. I think peace through strength that Ronald Reagan proposed
to deal with the Cold War is similar to what we have to do now in dealing with
this terrorist war against us. That's why my first commitment to the American
people is to be on offense against terrorists.

I also believe that we have to pursue those principles of lower taxes,
restraining spending, devolving power to people, getting power to governments
that are closest to the people. I believe those are the core of the
conservative coalition that makes us a 50-state party.

There are some disagreements on social issues. Not on goals, but on some of
the methods. But if we want to be a party that can run and win in states that
Ronald Reagan won -- New York, California, Connecticut, New Jersey,
Washington, Oregon, states we haven't won in a long, long time, and states in
which we don't even campaign any longer, we're going to have to take a really
good look at what made up the Reagan coalition. It was a broad outreach, an
inclusive one, not one that kept people away.


 Well, this really should give us some sort of indication that the NIE should not be interpreted as the -- the National Intelligence Estimate, where it was suggested that possibly Iran had stopped their nuclear program in 2003, high confidence that they stopped it in 2003, only moderate confidence that they haven't continued it. 

I think an incident like this reminds us that we shouldn't be lulled into some
false sense of confidence about Iran. We have to be very focused on the fact
that Iran should not be allowed to become a nuclear power. We should make it
very, very clear that we're not going to allow that, and we should go to every
country that we can think of to impose serious sanctions on Iran.

There are also indications that there are economic problems within Iran
itself, domestic difficulties in Iran. We've seen some conflict between some
of the leaders there. Maybe by using this incident and the fact that Iran
certainly shouldn't be seen as benign, as some people saw it when they tried
to spin the NIE, as suggesting that maybe we were being too serious about
Iran. It would seem to me that this incident should wake a lot of people up.


 Well, I think the most important thing is the steps that the Palestinian Authority now takes and how realistic they are to accomplish at least three things. 

First of all, to make it clear that it will accept the right of Israel to
exist as a Jewish state. Number two, to forgo terrorism, first as a statement
of policy, and then in reality. Something that has to be tested.

You know, Ronald Reagan had a theory of trust but verify. So we get the
statement of policy that they've -- they will forego terrorism, and then we're
going to want to see a period of time in which they've actually accomplished
that and we don't have terrorist acts.

I'd also like to say something to my friend John. John gets great credit for
supporting the surge.

But, John, there were other people on this stage that also supported the
surge.


 I think the idea that Israel is a stepchild of the United States is totally absurd. I've been to Israel very often, as the governor has. The prime minister of Israel is a very close friend of mine. The former prime minister is a very close friend of mine. 

The reality is that Israel is a close and strong ally of the United States.
America has only a few extremely reliable allies, special relationships. The
defense of Israel is of critical importance to the United States of America,
and it goes much deeper than just tactical things.

Secondly, on Musharraf, which was the question on the table, we have to have a
very clear picture of who and what would replace Musharraf. But we should put
more pressure on him to catch bin Laden. I believe I could convince him that
we should be allowed to work with him to catch bin Laden, because I think that
would be a major breakthrough in crushing Al Qaida.


 Well, I guess the first point I wanted to make on what they were talking about is that the kind of change that the Democrats want to bring about is to take the change out of your pocket. 

That's basically -- basically, change is either good or bad. And when you just
say "change," if the change that you're talking about is raising taxes, if the
change that you're talking about is pulling out of Iraq precipitously, if the
change that you're talking about is socialized medicine, these are definitely
changes, but they're changes in the wrong direction.

So I think people have to focus a little bit more carefully on, what is it
that we're promising? And what are we trying to do? Now, if the change is in
the direction of lower taxes, less spending, giving parents choice over
education, energy independence, these are things that are going to make a
brighter future and a better America. But just the word "change" doesn't
connote good or bad. You've got to get one step beyond that and start looking
at the changes.

Now, on my foreign policy experience, which is what you asked me about, I've
had foreign policy experience going back to 1970s when I served on a committee
in the Ford administration on terrorism.

I negotiated agreements with governments over illegal immigration. I
negotiated agreements with governments over prisoners.

When I had to make decisions about foreign policy, I made decisions. I threw
Arafat out of the U.N. 50 celebration, and I made sure Castro wouldn't come to
that celebration.


 And when I was confronted by an Arab prince who wanted to give us $10 million for the Twin Towers fund, I said, "No, we're not going to take it," because he wanted us to question American foreign policy, in particular, our relationship with Israel. 

As mayor of New York, I was involved in foreign policy issues all the time and
the difference between being an executive and being a legislator is you're not
just one of 100. You have to actually make decisions and there are
consequences to your decisions and many of them are in this area of either
foreign policy or related to it.


 Well, the reality is, it would have been absurd to ask illegal immigrants reporting crimes about their illegal immigrant status, because then you would not have gotten the information about the person who committed the murder, the person who committed the mugging, the person who committed the rape. And a person who commits those kinds of crimes doesn't looking for green cards when they commit those crimes. So it would have been irresponsible in the highest degree to not allow them to report it. 

And the policies that I had in New York with regard to illegal immigrants,
which allowed illegal immigrants to report crimes, helped to bring crime down
more than any city in America, more than any city in the history of America.
So I'm very proud of it. Had I done anything else, I think I would have ended
up with a city that had the problems before I came into office.

The same thing with allowing children to go to school. I allowed children of
illegal immigrants to go to school.

I had 70,000 children of illegal immigrants. What was I going to do, allow
them to be on the streets so that they could become the victims of crime on
the streets, maybe engage in crime themselves on the streets? Those are the
exceptions that were made.

On the other hand, we reported every single criminal. We reported every single
person suspected of crime. We reported so many to the immigration service that
the immigration service actually asked New York City to stop reporting.

I believe I would be the best at ending illegal immigration because I have
accomplished things like that before. You have got to change behavior here.

It's not very different than the way in which I changed behavior about crime
in New York and the way I changed behavior about Welfare. We have got to have
a system where we have a tamper-proof I.D. card. If you want to come into this
country, you should be able to come in legally.


 We have only 14,000 Border Patrol, and we have 12 million illegal immigrants. 


 Do you think we can handle the problem with 14,000 border patrol unless we make some very big changes? 


 I think this package, for what it does, is okay, and I would support it, but it doesn't go far enough. I think in the face of what's been going on, which obviously is a matter of serious concern, we should be very aggressive. 

Congressman Dreier and Senator Bond introduced legislation -- I think it was
yesterday -- that with my tax package, it would be the largest tax reduction
in American history. It would take the Bush tax cuts, make them permanent,
reduce the corporate tax, reduce the capital gains tax, reduce taxes on those
things that would allow business to see America as more competitive. And you
almost don't have a distinction any longer between temporary and permanent in
the kind of an economy that we live in.

Is it a problem for your campaign that the economy is now the most important
issue, one that, by your own acknowledgement, you are not well versed on?


 Well, first of all, let's distinguish it from the presentation of the $10 million check. That was a very different circumstance. The prince came to Ground Zero. At the request of the White House, I took him there to show him the devastation, I think in part to see how much of an alliance we could get and how much empathy we could get and how much support we could get. 

He presented me with a $10 million check for the Twin Towers Fund, and I took
it.

And then an hour or so later, he -- I found out he issued a press release
attacking American foreign policy, and saying that American foreign policy and
American support for Israel was one of the causes of it. And I gave him the
check back because I thought, and so did the people that advised me -- they
thought of it as blood money. That's a different circumstance than an
investment in a private institution.

America is in a global economy. That's what we are; that's where we are. We
have to look carefully at investments to make sure they're honest, to make
sure they're transparent, to make sure there's no other hidden motivation
behind it. But we are engaged in the global economy. And when countries invest
in the United States, there's a mutuality of interest that's developed that is
helpful to us.

Remember, back in the '80s, all of the discussion and worry about Japanese
investment? I think they even bought your building, right?

MR.: Rockefeller Plaza.


 Well, there was a big worry that it was going to become a Japanese building, and it all changed. What happened? It all worked its way into the economy. Japan and the United States became even closer friends. They're one of our strongest allies now. 

I'm pretty much in favor of trade and I'm pretty much in favor of free trade.

You've got to be careful when you have investments like this that there's no
ulterior motive. But if there isn't, then this is a good thing. And we should
be considering what we should be selling to them. We should be very aggressive
about the global economy. Americans should be thinking about how much can we
sell to the rest of the world and how much can we invest in them as they're
investing in us?


 I'm the only one who's actually turned around a government economy. I mean, the reality is when I became mayor of New York the economy of New York was in very, very bad shape -- tremendous deficits, ten-and-a-half percent unemployment, 300,000 jobs gone. We turned that around, cut unemployment by more than half, brought in 450,000 new jobs, and we cut taxes by 17 percent. And we did it based on growth principles, exactly the principles that are in the growth package that was introduced in Congress yesterday, which the Club for Growth said is the best stimulus for growth they've seen in a very long time. I've had the experience to do this in the 17th-largest economy in the world, and I can do it for the country. 


 It's very, very interesting the way you put that question is with a poll, because when the polls were six and seven out of 10 Americans thinking it was a good idea, Hillary Clinton was in favor of the war. And now when the polls are six out of 10 are against, Hillary Clinton is against the war. 


 I was for it when six out of 10 were for it; I'm for it when six out of 10 are against it. I'm for it not because of polls but because America is in a war, an Islamic terrorist war against us. America has to succeed in Iraq. And the goal in Iraq is an Iraq that's stable and an ally of the United States. And to be president of the United States, you have to be able to read polls, but you can't have them push you around. 


 Before, I told you I wasn't going to answer your question. (Laughter.) But I will. We were kidding around about the questions before, who was going to ask whom. 

The reality is that China is a great opportunity for America and a great
caution for America, both. It's a great opportunity for us to engage, to
engage in trade, and the more America engages in trade, the more we get to
know a country, the less likely we are to have military hostilities.

I think we should be working with China to try to push down some of these
barriers; protection for intellectual property; rule of law; an ability to sue
in China, so that you can be protected if you're doing business there. We've
got to be very careful about what we import from China, from the point of view
of safety and security, not as much from the point of view of our economy.

And then I think we have to look at the rise of China as a wonderful
opportunity. I see 20 (million) or 30 million people coming out of poverty in
China every year. To me, that's 20 (million) or 30 million more customers for
the United States. That's 20 (million) or 30 million more people we can be
selling things to.

We should be thinking like aggressive entrepreneurial Americans. What can we
sell to China? We can sell them energy independence. They need it more than we
do. We can sell them health processes. We can sell them information processes.
They are at a level of development that's here. We're at a higher level of
development. They need to buy what we have.

And then I believe there's a military aspect to it as well. I think we should
increase the size of our military substantially to overcome the damage that
Bill Clinton did with the peace dividend, because when the two of you were
talking about the military, what I wanted to jump in and say was, a lot of the
cause of this was Bill Clinton's peace dividend, in which he cut the military
25 and 30 percent.

We've never redone or did up -- made up for that damage.


 We have to do that. 


 I have a question for Governor Romney. 

Governor, people in Florida, as you know, traveling back and forth across the
state as I have, are having real difficulties getting property insurance. Some
of them can't afford it. For some it's not accessible at all. They're living
in these homes already and they may lose their homes. And, added to the other
burdens now in our economy, this is a really very difficult burden.

Senator McCain has said that he does not support a national catastrophic fund
as a backstop. I do. I believe it's necessary. I believe it can be done in a
way that is responsible and in a way that ultimately would actually cost the
government less money. Senator McCain believes that FEMA should handle this.


 Well, you can answer it too, John. 


 Okay. 

Now, you've said that -- I'm not sure exactly the position that you took on
it, and you said you were going to talk to the insurance companies and get
their advice. And I wonder if you have come to a position on it, because I
think this is something that is important to the people of Florida. Do you
have a position on the national catastrophic fund? Yes? No? And what
qualifications?


 But in that case, you used mandates, and you're not in favor of mandates for the country. 


 (Laughs.) 


 The very best way to do it is to support the technologies that are alternatives that can save the environment, and to get us to the point where those technologies can actually take over. 

We haven't -- we haven't licensed a nuclear power plant in 30 years. France is
80 percent nuclear; we're 20 percent nuclear, we're going down to 15 percent
nuclear. We have to crack through there.

We need to expand the use of hybrid vehicles.

We need to expand the use of clean coal. Carbon sequestration is expensive,
but it's a process that works.

We have more coal reserves in the United States than they have oil reserves in
Saudi Arabia. I prefer incentives for these new industries. Same thing is true
with biofuels.

We should expand biofuels, the way Brazil has done. We should expand wind,
solar, hydroelectric. We should expand natural gas, liquid natural gas. We
should have a project like putting the man on a moon, the way we did back in
the '50s and '60s.

It should be a major national project, to be energy independent. That's a
matter of national security. It's also the best way, the very best way, to
protect against global warming.

Just think about this. If we did everything we could, we put all these caps
on, all these negative incentives on, we would crush American industry. And
China and India would be sending out more greenhouse gases than we could ever
match.

You've got to solve it as a world problem. You cannot solve it just in the
United States. It needs new industries, new ideas. They're there. They need to
be supported, and you have to do this in a positive way, not a negative way.


 This has become a very competitive race, and I always expected it would be a very competitive race. And I believe that I'm going to have the same faith that the New York Giants had last week -- (laughter) -- and we're going to come from behind and surprise everyone. We have them all lulled into a very false sense of security now. We're going to -- (laughter) -- (chuckles) -- when -- when -- when Mitt Romney asked me a question, notice he asked me a very nice question. So I think I lulled him into a false sense of security. (Laughter.) And we are going to come from behind, we're going to win here in Florida, and if you look at the races that are coming up after that, I think we're -- we're in good shape. 

You know, this is -- these are terrific candidates. They're all running very,
very good races. I always expected it would be very close. And I think, as it
all got down to it, everyone is going to have a chance, and I think we're
going to do very well here in Florida, and I think we're going to do very well
on February 5th, and I believe that I'll get the nomination.


 (Laughs.) The reality is I believe that America is a country that is built around the English language. If you want to become a citizen, you should demonstrate your facility with English. If you know other languages, that is wonderful. That's a wonderful thing. And if we have substantial portions of populations that know other languages, I'm very comfortable trying to reach them in both English and in Spanish. 

The core of my plan on immigration is to stop illegal immigration at the
border with a border stat system, with technology, with an increased Border
Patrol. I believe we can stop illegal immigration if we stop it right at the
border.

And then we should develop a tamper-proof ID card so that people who want to
come into the United States should be allowed to do that. We need to teach new
behavior. The new behavior is, if you want to come into the United States, you
have to identify yourself -- which, after all, makes the United States like
every other country, right?

You can't get into most countries without identifying yourself. And then if
you've got the tamper-proof ID card, you'd be allowed to work, pay taxes, get
online, become a citizen, follow the rules, but then at the end of the line,
you'd have to be able to read, write and speak English.

If you speak a second language or a third language or a fourth language, I
think that's great for America. I think America has to be a country that has
facility with more languages, given the global economy we live in. And I think
we can be very comfortable with that, but the focus has to be on being able to
read, write and speak English if you want to be a citizen.


 Well, of course, this was developed in the 1960s, because the longest dictatorship, I believe, in the modern world, is the one of Fidel Castro. The presumption is that if you're fleeing Fidel Castro, given decades and decades of murder, oppression -- including, most recently, the way he cracked down on the Cambio Group (ph), Brothers to the Rescue, all of these things -- there's a presumption in the immigration law that if you're fleeing Fidel Castro, you're fleeing political persecution. 

In every other situation, you have to prove it. If you can prove that you're
fleeing political persecution, you'll be accepted.

We've had this exception now for, what, for 40 years? And I think it's a fair
one, given the history of Castro, which is a pretty unusual one. And he is the
longest-standing dictator, certainly in this hemisphere, I believe in the
world.


 (Laughs.) 


 Because I probably never did anything The New York Times suggested I do in eight years as mayor of New York City. (Laughter.) And if I did, I wouldn't be considered a conservative Republican. (Applause.) I changed welfare, I changed quality of life, I took on homelessness, I did all the things that they thought make you mean, and I believe show rue compassion and true love for people. I moved people from welfare to work. When I did that, when I set up workfare, the New York Times wrote nasty editorials about how mean I was, how cruel I was. 

I think there's a serious ideological difference. And I worked for Ronald
Reagan. And I remember once, when I was in the Justice Department, The New
York Times wrote a very laudatory editorial about my boss, Bill Smith, the
attorney general. And Bill was very nervous that Ronald Reagan would get upset
that we were off agenda, because of the good New York Times editorial.
(Chuckles.)

So the reality is that I think there is serious ideological differences. That
probably was some of the nicest language they've written about me in the last
six months.

 I'm Rudy Giuliani. I agree with the motto of your state, "Live free or die." And I think it would be a pretty good one for our time. 


 Absolutely the right thing to do. It's unthinkable that you would leave Saddam Hussein in charge of Iraq and be able to fight the war on terror. And the problem is that we see Iraq in a vacuum. Iraq should not be seen in a vacuum. Iraq is part of the overall terrorist war against the United States. 

The problem the Democrats make is they're in denial. That's why you hear
things like you heard in the debate the other night, that, you know, Iran
really isn't dangerous; it's 10 years away from nuclear weapons. Iran is not
10 years away from nuclear weapons, and the danger to us is not just missiles,
the danger to us is a state like Iran handing nuclear weapons over to
terrorists, so it has to be seen in that light, and we have to be successful
in Iraq.


 Part of the premise of talking to Iran has to be that they have to know very clearly that it is unacceptable to the United States that they have nuclear power. I think it could be done with conventional weapons, but you can't rule out anything and you shouldn't take any option off the table. 

And during the debate the other night, the Democrats seemed to be back in the
1990s. They don't seem to have gotten beyond the Cold War. Iran is a threat, a
nuclear threat, not just because they can deliver a nuclear warhead with
missiles. They're a nuclear threat because they are the biggest state sponsor
of terrorism and they can hand nuclear materials to terrorists. And we saw
just last week in New York an attempt by Islamic terrorists to attack JFK
Airport; three weeks ago, an attempt to attack Fort Dix.


 These are real problems. This war is not a bumper sticker. This war is a real war. 


 The problem with this immigration plan is it has no real unifying purpose. It's a typical Washington mess. It's - everybody compromises, four or five compromises, and the compromises leave you with the following conclusion. The litmus test you should have for legislation is, is it going to make things better? And when you look at these compromise, it is quite possible it will make things worse. 

The organizing purpose should be that our immigration laws should allow us to
identify everyone who is in this country that comes here from a foreign
country. They should have a tamper-proof ID card. It should be in a database
that allows you to figure out who they are, why they're here, make sure
they're not illegal immigrants coming here for a bad purpose, and then to be
able to throw out the ones who are not in that database. We can do that.
Credit card companies -


 \- take care of data that is greater than that. 


 I've read the 400 pages, and this is part of the problem in Washington - they say things and then it's not in the legislation. There are four or five different methods of identification, not one. It does not provide information about who exited the United States. Now tell me how you're going to figure out who's in the United States, if you can't figure out who's left the United States. And finally, it doesn't provide for a uniform database. Many countries have this. 

The United States doesn't have it.

On September 11th, when we tried to figure out who was in this country, it
took weeks to figure out who were the right people and who weren't, because
there isn't such a database.


 And that is a fatal flaw in this legislation, and wishing it away doesn't make it possible. 


 (Inaudible.) 


 (Laughs.) (I'm not going to give an answer. ?) 


 Well, you know - well, a Catholic bishop - (off mike) - 


 (Laughs.) Yeah, I know. 


 Look, for someone who went to parochial schools all his life, this is a very frightening thing that's happening right now. (Laughter.) 

But the reality is, I respect, you know, the opinion of Catholic - (off mike)
- religious leaders of all kinds. Religion is very important to me, it's a
very important part of my life. But ultimately, as a - (off mike) - I've been
in public life most of my life and taken oaths of office to enforce the law,
I've got to make the decisions that I think are the right ones in a country
like ours.

And my view on abortion is that it's wrong, but that ultimately government
should not be enforcing that decision on a woman. That's - that is my view
that I - I consult my religion, I consult my reading of the Constitution, I
consult my views of what I think are important in a pluralistic society, and
the reality that we have to respect the fact that there are people that are
equally as religious, equally as moral that make a different decision about
this. And should government put them in jail?


 I think we have to accept the view that scientists have that there is global warming and that human operation, human condition, contributes to that. And the fact is that there is a way to deal with it and to address it in a way that we can also accomplish energy independence, which we need as a matter of national security. 

It's frustrating and really dangerous for us to see money going to our enemies
because we have to buy oil from certain countries. We should be supporting all
the alternatives. We need a project similar to putting a man on the moon. That
project started with Eisenhower. It was carried out by Kennedy and then
Johnson and then Nixon. And that was two Democrats and two Republicans working
- (audio difficulties) - working in the national interest.


 This is not the time to deal with disruptive issues like this. Back in 1994 we went through this and it created a tremendous amount of disruption. Colin Powell, I think, was still the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff before he left at the beginning of the Clinton administration. He came to the view that this was a good policy. And I think in time of war, in a time where we're trying to deal with this transition to a new kind of warfare that we have to be fighting - and we haven't gotten all the way there yet, we need a hybrid army, we need to look at nation-building as part of what we have to teach our military - I don't think this would be the right time to raise these issues. 


 And I think we should rely on the judgment of our commanders in a situation like this. They know what's disruptive and what's not. And at a time of war, you don't make fundamental changes like this. 


 I think the sentence was way out of line. I mean, the sentence was grossly excessive in a situation in which at the beginning, the prosecutor knew who the leak was - 


 \- and he knew a crime wasn't committed. I recommended over a thousand pardons to President Reagan when I was associate attorney general. I would see if it fit the criteria for pardon. I'd wait for the appeal. I think what the judge did today argues more in favor of a pardon - 


 \- because this is excessive punishment - 


 \- when you consider - I've prosecuted 5,000 cases - 


 Well, this is a very important issue. This is a very, very important - a man's life is at stake. And the reality is, this is an incomprehensible situation. They knew who the leak was - 


 \- and ultimately, there was no underlying crime involved. 


 (Laughs.) Michael, thank you very much for serving us, and thank your family for their tremendous sacrifice. 

I'd like to put it in a slightly different context. I believe that your
service for us and your brother's sacrifice is one of the reasons we're safe
now in the United States. I believe that this terrorist war began way back in
the 1970s. They attacked us in 1993 in New York. They attacked us again in
2001 in a horrible way. And I believe that what we're doing in Iraq, if we can
get it right, is going to help reduce the risk for this country. And if we get
it wrong, it's going to be much, much worse for us.

And part of what we have to do, and we haven't done right, is take on that
responsibility of nation-building. We created that responsibility for
ourselves when we overthrew Saddam Hussein, which we did very effectively. It
was one of the greatest military actions in American history overthrowing
Saddam Hussein.

But we didn't accomplish the second step. People can only embrace democracy
when they have an orderly existence, and we have to help province that. We
didn't want that role, but it is our role. We have to train our military to do
it. We should probably have an Iraq stat program, in which we measure how many
people are going to school, how many factories are open, how many people are
going to back to work. We had to get into the nitty-gritty of putting an
orderly society together in Iraq. It is not too late to do it.

And I'd just like to ask the one question I didn't get to ask before. When you
said if General Petraeus comes back in September and reports that things
aren't going well, what are we going to do? But suppose General Petraeus comes
back in September and reports that things are going pretty well. Are we going
to report that with the same amount of attention that we report the negative
news? (Applause.)


 What I would do is change the whole model that we have for health insurance in this country. The problem with our health insurance is it's government- and employer-dominated. People don't make individual choices. It's your health; you should own your health insurance. We should be giving you a major tax deduction - $15,000 for a family - so you can buy your own health insurance. If you buy health insurance for 8,000 (dollars) or 9,000 (dollars), you'll save five (thousand dollars) or $6,000 in tax-free money. Then we should have a health savings account in which you can put some money aside to pay for your ordinary medical expenses. 

Health insurance should become like homeowners insurance or like car
insurance: You don't cover everything in your homeowners policy. If you have a
slight accident in your house, if you need to refill your oil with your car,
you don't cover that with insurance. But that is covered in many of the
insurance policies because they're government dominated and they're employer
dominated. What the Democrats suggested on this stage two nights ago was
socialized medicine. There's a man in California who said to me, "When we make
health insurance free, just wait and see how expensive it will become." And
the reality is that we need a free market. We need 100 million Americans
making different decisions that will bring down the cost of health insurance,
it will bring down the cost of prescription medicines. Free-market principles
are the only things that reduce cost and improve quality. Socialized medicine
will ruin medicine in the United States. (Applause.)


 I think the governor is correct. I'd put it maybe in a slightly different way. We have great gifts in this country that come to us from God. We have a country in which we have freedom of religion, freedom of press, freedom for the individual, the right to elect our own officials. And the reality is that in some of the world, much of the world, that doesn't exist. 

I think the challenge for our generation is going to be, are we able to share
those gifts in an appropriate way with the rest of the world? If we can bring
along the Middle East, if we can bring along those countries that are
presently our enemies and get them to see the values of these ideals, if we
have the moral strength to be able to explain it to them in the way Ronald
Reagan was able to do with Communism, then we can - we can end up having the
peace that we want.

And we should not - we should never become pessimistic about this. Remember
this is the country that was at war with Vietnam just a short while ago; we're
friends now.


 This was a country that was at war with Japan, Italy and Germany a generation ago. They're some of our best friends today. 


 We have great resources in this country. And watching the strength of America when we believe in the essential ideals that we have, they're not just American ideals, they come from God. And I think it's our moral obligation to find the right way to share that with the rest of the world. 


 I would like to add to what John was saying. The thing that I would do different is I would establish accountability in Washington. 

Washington is a mess, and that's one of the reasons Republicans lost.
Republicans became Democrats. I would establish programs like I did in New
York City, where I had to deal with a heavily Democratic city - FedStat
programs to measure accountability.


 You get what you measure. If you don't measure success, you have failure. And I turned around New York City; I can turn around Washington. 


 No, I'm very uncomfortable with it. I mean, the reality is, it's one thing to be debating illegal immigration. It's a very complex subject. I think we've had a very good debate about it. And I think the bill needs to be fixed in the way that I've indicated. But we shouldn't be having a debate about legal immigration. 

Abraham Lincoln defined what an American is better than I'm going to be able
to do it or Congressman Tancredo or anyone on the stage. Abraham Lincoln, who
fought the know-nothing movement, said being an American is not whether you
came over on the Mayflower or you came here yesterday. How much do you believe
in freedom? How much do you believe in freedom of religion? How much do you
believe in freedom for women? How much do you believe in the right to vote?
How much do you believe in the rule of law?

The person who believes in that the most is the best American, and the person
who doesn't isn't an American.


 That's Abraham Lincoln's words. We should always be open to legal immigration. It reforms us. It makes us better. It brings us people who want to make a better life for themselves - 


 \- and their families. If we lose that, we lose the genius that has made America what it is. 


 I think, ma'am, the way to accomplish what you want is to nominate me. (Laughter.) That would be the way to do it. And I think the Republican Party can unite around two major principles that are bigger than all of us: being on offense against terrorism, unlike the Democrats, who are on defense against terrorism, and you saw that two nights ago here. They couldn't even utter the word(s) "Islamic terrorism." It's our biggest enemy. They couldn't utter it. We need somebody who can stand up to that. 

And second, someone who will be on offense for a growth economy. Fight this
impulse to raise taxes, do socialized medicine -


 \- put everything in government. Those are the two big principles that unite us and make us a majority party - 


 \- and we have to respect some of our differences. (Applause.) 


 I think you run on your foreign policy ideas, theories and policies, which I've laid out in articles. 

And I think the president got the big decision of his presidency right: the
big decision that he made on September 20th, 2001, when he put us on offense
against Islamic terrorism. And I give him great credit for that. Because we
had been dealing with Islamic terrorism incorrectly up until then. We had been
on defense. We had been responding.

The president set a whole different mindset. It was: Let's anticipate, let's
see if we can prevent another attack.

That led to Afghanistan, it led to Iraq, it's led to the Patriot Act, it's led
to electronic surveillance, it's led to changing our intelligence services.
All that is very, very good.

Mistakes have also been made. Mistakes were made particularly in the period of
time after the capture of Saddam Hussein and, now, a year ago, when we got to
the surge policy.


 And... 


 ... if I may add, I think one of the things that would help answer some of the issues that have come up is, we should increase the size of our military. 

Bill Clinton cut the military drastically. It was called the peace dividend,
one of those nice-sounding phrases: very devastating. It was a 25, 30 percent
cut in the military.

President Bush has never made up for that. Our Army had been at 725,000; it's
down to 500,000. We need at least 10 more combat brigades. We need our Marines
at 200,000. We need a 300-ship Navy.

This president should do it now. If I'm president, I'll do it immediately.


 Charlie? 


 Just make one point. 

Ron's analysis is really seriously flawed. The idea that the attack took place
because of American foreign policy is precisely the reason I handed back a $10
million check to a Saudi prince who gave me the money at ground zero for the
twin towers fund and then put out a press release saying America should change
its foreign policy.


 It seems to me, if you don't face this squarely -- there's an Islamic, terrorism threat against us. It's an existential threat. It has nothing to do with our foreign policy. It has to do with their ideas, their theories, the things that they have done and the way they've perverted their religion into a hatred of us. 

And what's at stake are the things that are best about us: our freedom of
religion, our freedom for women, our right to vote, our free economic system.

Our foreign policy is irrelevant -- totally irrelevant. If you read what they
write, if you bother to listen to what they say, this comes out of their own
perverted thinking.


 Ron, Ron... 


 Ron, it's simply not true. 

Islamic terrorists killed over 500 Americans before September 11, 2001, going
back to the late 1960s. They have also killed people recently in Bali, in
London. They have launched attacks in Germany.

(UNKNOWN): Madrid.


 Where did the attack on the Munich Olympics take place: in the United States, or did it take place in Germany? 


 I could go on and on. The attack on Leon Klinghoffer. 

Islamic terrorists have attacked us...


 ... and our allies all over the world... 


 I do not. 

(CROSSTALK)


 Charlie, you wanted a free-for-all. 

It is important to make this point. Just the opposite, Ron. I have great
respect for the Islamic religion. I have great respect for the Arab world, for
the Middle East.

I think we should be closer to them. I think we should trade more with them. I
think we should have cultural exchanges with them.

The overwhelming majority of the Islamic world...


 ... and on the evening of September 11, 2001, the day my city was attacked, I got on television, and I said to the people of my city, "We're not going to engage in group blame. This is a small group of people. This does not typify a great religion and a great people." 


 I do not accept that criticism. 

(CROSSTALK)


 I think what the president had in mind is that at the core of leadership is knowing what you believe, standing for something. 

Ronald Reagan was my hero in that respect. I wrote about it in my book,
"Leadership." And I think one of the things President Bush was getting at is
that too many people in politics today put their finger up and go with the
poll.

You know, you can see it in some of our Democratic colleagues, changing their
position...


 What do I stand for? 

I laid out 12 commitments to the American people. I wrote them out. The first
one is the most important: keeping this country on offense in the Islamic
terrorist war against us.

The rest of them lay out what I believe this country has to do over the next
four years. That would be my guidepost. If I'm elected president, I'll put
that card on my desk. And every day I will try to accomplish it.

End illegal immigration. Solve health care through private options. Reduce
taxes. Reduce the size of government on the civilian side.


 Expand the military. Appoint strict constructionist judges. 

These'll be the beliefs that I have, the way Ronald Reagan got elected to
increase the size of the military, to reduce taxes.


 Charlie, that's the reason why you lay out the things that you believe in. 


 There are beliefs that you have that you're not going to vary from, no matter what the winds of change bring about. There are some that you are going to change. 

Look at Ronald Reagan. Ronald Reagan had three prime goals: to increase the
size of the military to win the Cold War, to reduce taxes and to reduce the
deficit. He accomplished two of the three. The third one he wasn't able to
accomplish, probably because the first two, in his view, were more important.

So of course you can't accomplish every single thing that you want. Over a
period of time, your views on things are going to change. But if your
essential philosophy stays the same, the way it did with Ronald Reagan, the
way it did with our great presidents, that's what leadership is about.


 The reality is that, with all of its infirmities and difficulties, we have the best health care system in the world. And it may be because we have a system that still is, if not wholly, at least in large part still private. 

To go in the direction that the Democrats want to go, much more government
care, much more government medicine, socialized medicine, is going to mean a
deteriorated state of medicine in this country.


 I mean, I said, jokingly, in one debate, if we go in the direction of socialized medicine, where will Canadians come for health care? 

(LAUGHTER)

(CROSSTALK)


 Charlie, that doesn't mean it shouldn't be improved. And I think that the notion of people buying their own private health insurance is a very good one, so long as a lot of them do it. 

Only 17 million Americans right now buy their own health insurance. If 50
million Americans were buying their own health insurance, because it would be
just as tax advantageous to do it that way, and we had a health savings
account, people -- economists believe there'd be a 30 percent to 50 percent
reduction in the cost of health insurance, and quality would come up.

The only thing that reduces cost and increases quality is a significant,
dramatic, large consumer market, not government control.


 Charlie, a health savings account actually helps to accomplish what the governor is talking about. 

If somebody can put aside -- and the plans that we've been talking about
include a health savings account. You'd have an exemption up to $15,000. If
you could find a policy for $11,000, you can have a $4,000 health savings
account.

You would be able to buy some of your health care and your prevention
yourself. It gives you an incentive over a lifetime to deal with wellness.


 What I believe should happen is we should stop illegal immigration at the border, and we should begin doing it now. 


 We should erect a fence. We should erect a technological fence. We should expand the Border Patrol. We should have a BorderStat system. We should have a rule that you cannot come into the United States without identifying yourself, which, after all, is the rule in every other country just about. 

And then we should operate that for two, three, four years, change behavior.
And then we should take that system, with a tamper- proof I.D. card, which
would be used for people coming into this country, and what we should do with
the people that are here.

First of all, right now, our priorities should be -- since you can't throw out
all 12 million people, whether Governor Romney would like to do that or not or
anybody else would, you just can't do it. It's not physically possible to do.

I would focus on the illegal immigrants that are here who have committed
crimes. They should be given priority. That's a number we can deal with.
That's a number we can throw out.


 Then what I would do with the people that are here, when you had a good system in place -- and I believe my plan is the best plan for doing that, and these are the kinds of things I achieved in the other jobs that I've had in my life, as mayor and associate attorney general -- I think what you would do then is, you would say to the 12 million people that are here, come forward, get a tamper- proof I.D. card, get fingerprinted, get photographed. 

If they don't come forward, then you throw them out of the country. The ones
who do come forward would have to pay taxes. They'd have to pay fines.

If you pay fines, it is not amnesty. They would not get ahead of anybody else.
They'd be at the back of the line. But then they could eventually become
citizens, so long as they could read English, write English and speak English.


 Charlie, if Ronald Reagan were here, who we all invoke, who would grab the microphone, say, "It's my microphone, I paid for it." 


 And Ronald Reagan did amnesty. He actually did amnesty. I think he'd be in one of Mitt's negative commercials. 

(LAUGHTER)

And he is the hero of our party.

None of us, none of us has a perfect record on immigration because this is a
very complicated problem. The thing that we have to do is we have to decide
who has the best plan among all of us for fixing illegal immigration.

You got to stop it at the border. You got to stop it cold at the border. And
then you have to have a rational system.

It is not amnesty. If you charge -- I did this more in my life than I did
politics, meaning law enforcement -- if you charge fines, if you have
impositions of conditions, it is not amnesty.

Ronald Reagan gave amnesty, saying they have to pay a fine, have to get on the
back of the line, have a whole bunch of conditions...

(CROSSTALK)


 That is not amnesty. That is not amnesty. 

If you have a fine, if you have conditions, if you have a whole bunch of steps
that people have to go through, it is not amnesty.

Ronald Reagan gave amnesty, straight-out amnesty.


 But if you have to pay a penalty for it, it is not. For example... 


 Pay money, have to follow... 


 Well, but you have to pay penalties. 


 There are all different kinds of penalties. 


 Someone gets amnesty from a crime... 


 I have to answer... 

(CROSSTALK)


 I have to answer that -- I have to answer that question. New York City was not a sanctuary city. New York City turned in the names of every single person who committed a crime or was suspected of a crime. 


 Well, New York City turned in the names of all people that were illegal, with only three exceptions. One exception was for children that were going to school. We had 70,000 children of illegals. I was not going to leave them on the street. I am proud that I continued that policy. It would have been inhumane to do anything else. 


 Let me finish. Let me finish. 

Second, we said, "If you come into a hospital and you need treatment for an
emergency, you'll be treated." It would have been inhumane to do anything
else.

And we said, "If you report crimes, we will take those reports." And we wanted
those reports of crimes because they helped us to reduce crime...

(CROSSTALK)


 Those are the three narrow categories that I was objecting to. They all had to do with humane conditions. It was a policy that was... 


 I think the problem Barack Obama would have is, first of all, he's never run a city, never run a state, never run a business. I don't think at a time when America's at war, with the major problems that we face, we're going to want someone to get on- the-job experience as the chief executive, never having had that kind of experience. 

I do think he's embraced change, but change is a concept. Is it change for
good or change for bad?


 Changing, and having higher taxes, in my view, would be very bad for our economy. Changing, and moving toward socialized medicine would be very bad for our health care system. 

Changing, by a precipitous withdrawal from Iraq, without considering the
consequences -- he voted for giving the enemy a timetable of our retreat in
Iraq. Unheard of in a time of war.

So I would say that virtually the same issues that exist between me and, let's
say, Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, John Edwards, they are really issues
between Republicans and Democrats.

And in the case of Senator Obama, he really doesn't have the experience,
either from the national security point of view or even from just the
executive point of view.


 Charlie, we really have to take the idea of energy independence and turn it into a program for energy independence. We've been talking about it since Richard Nixon, Jimmy Carter -- never done it. And it has to be done on the scale of putting a man on the moon. 

All of the things that they've all talked about, we've talked about it a long
time; we just haven't done it.


 We've got to expand nuclear. We've got to do clean coal. We've got to expand the use of hybrid vehicles, wind, solar, hydroelectric, liquid natural gas, natural gas, domestic oil, more refineries. 

Senator Thompson is absolutely right: We haven't built a refinery, I think, if
30 years. We haven't licensed a nuclear power plant in 30 years.

France is 80 percent nuclear. We're 20 percent nuclear. China is building 40
nuclear power plants. We're having trouble getting one licensed for the last
30 years.

If we don't make this a major program, led by the president of the United
States, the way Eisenhower started the program to put a man on the moon and
then Kennedy followed and then Johnson followed and Nixon got it done -- two
Republicans, two Democrats -- it should be an American achievement.

 First of all, that isn't exactly what I said. I was talking about the timetable for retreat that the Democrats passed in Congress, in which they did something extraordinary and that I've never heard of in the history of war, which is to give your enemy a schedule of how a retreating army is going to retreat. That was irresponsible, highly irresponsible. 

What the Republicans did, or suggested, I don't think is the right approach
either.

And I think Senator McCain is correct, these people do want to follow us here
and they have followed us here. Fort Dix happened a week ago. That was a
situation in which six Islamic terrorists, who were not directed by al Qaeda
but claimed to have been inspired by them, were going to kill our military in
cold blood at Fort Dix. It was a 16-month investigation done by the FBI and
the United States Attorney's Office, and thank God they caught them.

But we have to remind ourselves that we are facing an enemy that is planning
all over this world, and it turns out planning inside our country, to come
here and kill us. And the worst thing to do in the face of that is to show
them weakness.


 Yes. 


 Well, as the Club for Growth pointed out yesterday in the report they did on me, I ran probably one of the most fiscally conservative governments in the last 30 or 40 years. Spending actually decreased in comparison to the increase in population and inflation. Spending in New York City decreased more than just about any other state, considerably less than the federal government, while I was the mayor. 

I lowered taxes 23 times. And I'd have to point out to you, Wendell, I did it
in a place where it's real hard to do it. If you can lower spending in New
York City, Washington is easier than New York City to deal with!

And finally, I put controls on every one of the city agencies, which is what I
would do in Washington. I'd do Reagan-like across- the-board budget cuts 5 to
20 percent. And there's a great opportunity that we have coming up. About 50
percent, just about 50 percent of the federal employees are going to retire in
the next 10 years, during the term of, maybe, one of us. And we have the
opportunity of not refilling all those positions. And I would pledge not to
refill 50 percent of them.


 First of all, I think Rudy McRomney wouldn't make a bad ticket. (Laughter.) And I kind of like the order. I kind of like the order, John. 

But you know -- but in any event, you know, I think that we can respond to
that and discuss all that, but there's something I think really big at stake
here. We're looking at a race here in which the leading Democratic candidate
for president of the United States has said that the unfettered free market is
the most disastrous thing in modern America. That's a quote -- or that's a
quote she agreed with. She's also said, with regard to taxes, that we have to
take money from you in order to give it to the common good.

Now there's such a stark difference there that this election in 2008 is going
to make a very big difference about whether we go in that direction -- the
direction of removing private choice, putting government in a situation where
government is in charge of so many different things -- that I think those are
the things that we should be debating, and Republicans should be uniting to
make certain that what the liberal media is talking about, our inevitable
defeat, doesn't happen.


 I, according to George Will, ran the most conservative government in the last 50 years in New York City. I look for ways in which we can come together. 

I think we can agree, all of us on this stage, that we should seek reductions
in abortion. I ultimately do believe in a woman's right of choice, but I think
that there are ways in which we can reduce abortions. Abortions went down 16
percent when I was the mayor. Adoptions went up 133 percent during the eight
years that I was mayor, compared to the prior eight years. So there are ways
in which we can work together and achieve results that we all want.


 (Chuckles.) 


 Well, there is no circumstances under which I could possibly imagine anyone choosing slavery or supporting slavery. There are people, millions and millions of Americans, who are as of good conscience as we are, who make a different choice about abortion. And I think in a country where you want to keep government out of people's lives, or government out of people's lives from the point of view of coercion, you have to respect that. There are things that you can oppose, things you can be against; and then you can come to the conclusion, in the kind of democracy we have, the kind of society that we have, and the kind of society we have where we want to keep government out of people's personal lives, that you can respect other people's view on this. And I think everyone on this stage, including most Democrats, could probably very, very usefully spend a lot of time figuring out how we can reduce abortion. 

It's going to take a while for the courts to figure out what to do about this.

And while we're looking at that, we should do what I did in New York, which is
to try to reduce abortions as much as you can, try to increase adoptions.


 Well, first of all, I'd like to thank Congressman Tancredo for saying that I'm soft on anything. (Laughter.) That's the first time in about 20 years, since I was U.S. attorney, that anybody accused me of being soft. So it may help my reputation. 

The reality is, the focus on immigration should be to know everyone who's in
the United States. We should have a tamper-proof ID card; we should have a
database in which we can identify the people who are in this country.

I know something about security. I think I've had more experience at having to
secure a city, having to deal with security in the Justice Department, than, I
would say, anyone on this stage. And the reality is, we've got to be sensible
about immigration. If we do the kinds of things that some of the people here
are talking about, this country's going to be in greater danger; it is going
to be more insecure; we're going to face a situation in which terrorists like
the Fort Dix people, three of whom were illegal, can find a big underground to
hide in.

So we need a fence. We need a technological fence; we need a tamper-proof ID
card. And we need a way that people who are working in this country can come
forward, sign up for the tamper-proof ID card, get in the database and start
paying their way.


 Wendell, may I comment on that? That's really an extraordinary statement. That's an extraordinary statement, as someone who lived through the attack of September 11, that we invited the attack because we were attacking Iraq. I don't think I've heard that before, and I've heard some pretty absurd explanations for September 11th. (Applause, cheers.) 

And I would ask the congressman to withdraw that comment and tell us that he
didn't really mean that. (Applause.)


 Can I have 30 seconds, please? 


 They are coming -- 

(Cross talk.)


 In the hypothetical that you gave me, which assumes that we know there's going to be another attack and these people know about it, I would tell the people who had to do the interrogation to use every method they could think of. It shouldn't be torture, but every method they can think of -- 


 \-- and I would -- and I would -- well, I'd say every method they could think of, and I would support them in doing that because I've seen what -- (interrupted by applause) -- I've seen what can happen when you make a mistake about this, and I don't want to see another 3,000 people dead in New York or any place else. 


 I like Fred a lot. I think Fred is a really, really good man. I think he's done a pretty good job of playing my part on "Law &amp; Order." (Laughter.) I personally prefer the real thing, and -- but I think Fred will add something to this race. But I think this is a nomination you have to earn, though. 

Nobody's going to give it to you; nobody's going to glance it to you; nobody's
going to crown you.

You've got to go out there, like these gentlemen have done, and I've done.
You've got to -- you've got to meet people in Iowa and New Hampshire and all
over the country. You've got to work hard for this.

And finally I think it's going to come down to experience. This is not a time
that the United States should be electing someone who's going to get on-the-
job training. You need people with executive experience.

And my real concern is you have three leading Democratic candidates, none of
which have ever run a city, a state or a business. (Cheers, applause.) And
this is not -- this is -- America's at war. America's got some big problems.
It's not the time for on-the-job training as an executive.


 Chris, you haven't really described the entire extent of the executive order. The first part of the executive order points out that the police should report all illegals suspected of committing a crime or who have committed a crime. In fact, the year before I was mayor the immigration service stopped taking names from the police department of people that the police department were reporting. 

So the problem that I had was I had 400,000 illegal immigrants -- roughly --
in New York City, and I had a city that was the crime capital of America.

I had to do something intelligent with them. I didn't have the luxury of, you
know, political rhetoric. I had the safety and security of the people of New
York City on my shoulders.

So what I did was, I said -- and I think this is a sensible policy -- if you
are an illegal immigrant in New York City, and a crime is committed against
you, I want you to report that, because, lo and behold, the next time a crime
is committed, it could be against a citizen or a legal immigrant.

I said if you are a child in New York City -- of which we had 40(,000) to
50(,000) to 60,000 illegal immigrant children -- did it make sense to leave
them on the streets?

The federal government deported only 758 people that year from New York City.
So the reality is, my programs and policies led to a city that was the safest
large city in the country. So they must have been sensible policies.


 Well, I think the officer made the point I was just making earlier. What he said was, they turn over the names to ICE. I used to turn them over to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and nobody is deported. 

As I said, I had 400,000 illegal immigrants. The best year they ever had for
deportations was 2,000. I figured out I was stuck with 398,000. It's like
simple arithmetic.

So the reality is that we do have to stop illegal immigrants from coming in at
our border. It is a national priority.

And a physical fence isn't going to do the whole thing. We need a
technological fence. We need photographic equipment, heat-seeking equipment,
motion detection equipment. It all exists. It didn't exist 10 years ago, it
didn't exist 20 years ago, it exists today. Other countries do it.

And we need a tamper-proof single ID card for every single person who's in
this country from a foreign country, and if we can secure our borders and
illegal immigration, we will then be able to do what Governor Huckabee is
talking about with legal immigrants. We want to encourage legal immigration,
and we want to end illegal immigration.

And --


 \-- it is a very, very sensible policy. Most countries accomplish it. Most countries do not allow you to walk in without identifying yourself. 


 Well, I would say to him the FBI would disagree with that. New York City was during the years that I was mayor the safest large city in the United States. In fact, in 2000, which was one of the last years that I was mayor, it was 191 for crime in the country. 

For example in Boston, there was a 59 percent greater chance you'd be the
victim of a crime than in New York City. In many other cities, there was 100
to 300 percent greater chance that you'd be a victim of a crime than in New
York City.

One of the things that I accomplished as mayor of New York City was the
impossible. I took a city that was the crime capital of America, and I made it
not only the safest large city in America, I made it safer than 189 small
cities. So, I mean, people have their right to their own feelings. The reality
is you were safer in New York than just about any other city in the United
States after I was mayor for about three or four years.


 I think states have a right to decide that. I mean, states have an right to decide their gun laws. The 2nd Amendment grants you the right to bear arms. 

We have a federal system. A lot of these issues work in America, where we have
people of different views and different conscience, because we are a federal
system. We allow states to make different decisions.

The focus of our law should be on criminals. That's what I did in New York
City. I reduced shootings in New York City by 75 percent. And I did it by
focusing not on guns but on criminals, putting them in jail, putting them in
jail for long periods of time when they committed crimes with guns, and it
worked. (Applause.)


 I hope so. I hope we're able to go. I hope we can do it without creating a great deal of publicity. 

I have tremendous respect for Senator McCain. I think I've said more than
once, if I wasn't running, I'd probably be supporting him for president of the
United States. (Applause.) I just -- well, I just happen to think that the
better candidate -- me -- but, you know -- (laughter) -- the reality is that
I'm not running on what I did on September 11th.

I'm running on the -- I'm running on the fact that I was mayor of the largest
city in the country, the third-largest government in the country. I was tested
in that position with crisis almost every day.

And when I came into office, I took over a city with a massive fiscal crisis.
I took over a city with a massive crime crisis. We were on the front page of
Time magazine as "The Rotting of the Big Apple." And I turned over a city that
was the safest city in America, just about. I turned over a city that -- where
we had reduced taxes 23 times. I turned over a government that George Will
said was the most conservative government of anyone in the last 50 years. And
I turned over a city where people had hope that hadn't had hope before.

And before that, I was the third-ranking official in the Justice Department.
I've had a great deal of experience. I think it's the kind of experience that
helps to prepare for you president, if there's any experience that does.
(Applause.)


 I have a suggestion. 


 Well, this reminds me of the period of time in New York when judges would release criminals into the streets, or threaten to do it. We can't close Guantanamo because nobody will take the people there. (Laughter, applause.) I mean, I -- the president is attempting to move those people to other countries, and those countries are intelligent enough to say we don't want people as dangerous as this in our country. 

So what are you proposing, that we release them in New York or in Boston or in
Los Angeles? So there's a reality to this that the liberal media and some of
the Democratic politicians seem to try to avoid.

Also, this discussion of fighting a war where we're constantly discussing when
we're going to withdraw -- when has a nation ever won a war when the constant
discussion was, what kind of timetable were we going to set for our retreat?
In order to -- (applause) -- in order to win, you have to set an objective.

The objective should be an Iraq that is going to help us in the terrorists'
war against us. If Iraq is a battle in the terrorists' war against us, which
it is, then the winning of that battle constitutes an Iraq that will help us,
not an Iraq that will become a headquarters for Islamic terrorists.
(Applause.)


 It's a matter of principle. I think if you're president of the United States, you take one pledge: to uphold the Constitution of the United States. There would be literally -- (applause) -- there would be literally thousands of issues on which you would take a pledge if you let groups do that to you. So I've always taken the view that you take one pledge, it's to uphold the Constitution of the United States. 

It is my intention to lower taxes. I have without any doubt of all the people
running for president the strongest record of lowering taxes. I did it 23
times in a city that had never lowered a tax before well over $9 billion. I
lowered the personal income tax 25 percent, and I was collecting 40 percent
more in revenues from the lower tax than the higher tax. I made supply-side
economics work in a city that didn't understand it, and I ended up having a
very positive impact on the economy of the city as a result of that. I lowered
23 different taxes in a city that had a city council with 45 Democrats and six
Republicans.

So my record is very, very strong as a tax cutter, but I only think a man
running or a woman running for president should take one pledge and that is to
uphold the Constitution of the United States. (Applause.)


 I gather that question was for me? 


 Okay. (Laughter.) 

The reality is that I think someone's private life, someone's family life is
something that you all look into to determine how are they going to conduct
themselves in public office, and in my case, you have about 30, 35 years of
experience to figure out how I would.

I held one of the most difficult jobs in the country, sometimes described as
the second- or third-most difficult job in the country.

I held it under very difficult times. I'm not talking about September 11th;
I'm talking from the day I came into office with a fiscal crisis, a crime
crisis, a welfare crisis. I turned all those things around.

So quite obviously, any issues that go on in my private life, which I don't
think are terribly different than at least some people in this country -- I
certainly haven't lived a perfect life. I am not running as the perfect
candidate for president of the United States. I'm running as a human being who
has been very successful as a leader, and had definable results in a situation
in which people thought it was impossible to accomplish these things.

They thought it was impossible to take on the mafia; I succeeded in doing it.
(Bell sounds.) They thought it was impossible to reduce crime; I did. They
thought it was impossible to reduce welfare; I removed 640,000 people from the
welfare rolls. And they thought it was impossible to manage New York City --
it was described as an unmanageable city; now they're writing books about how
well I managed it.


 So obviously any issues in my private life do not affect my public performance. (Cheers, applause.) 


 Well, I think that we have to look Iran really in a different way than just a Cold War analysis. It's a different situation. Iran is right now the single biggest state sponsor of Islamic terrorism. I think everyone agrees on that. So the real risk, to me, is not their launching an attack, which they could do, and that's a plausible scenario. The more realistic one is, they're going to hand nuclear material off to the terrorists that they are presently supplying. It's not as if they're going to have go find them to give it to. They're giving them weapons right now. They're giving them armaments right now. They're giving them money right now. 

So America has to have a clear position. The position should be that Iran is
not going to be allowed to go nuclear.

Senator McCain put it very well two months ago. He said it would be very, very
dangerous to take military action against Iran, but it would be even more
dangerous if Iran were a nuclear power, and I think a president has to make
that very clear. And exactly when you would act and how you would act -- it
would be foolish for anyone running for president to answer a hypothetical
like that. I mean, one, it's an element of surprise; you want the other side
to understand that there's a step beyond which you will not go.

Ronald Reagan won the Cold War -- (bell) -- without firing a shot, but it was
-- it was because he pointed like a thousand missiles at Soviet cities.


 And he negotiated with them. (Laughter, applause.) I heard this confusion in the Democratic debate about when to talk and when not to talk -- well, he talked to them with a thousand missiles pointed directly at their cities. 


 Well, I mean, the market is a wonderful thing. I mean, the free market is our -- one of our greatest assets. The leading Democratic candidate once said that the unfettered free market is the most destructive force in modern America. I mean, just get an idea of where that philosophy comes from. 

The free market is the asset that has allowed us to -- the sky's the limit.
The reality is that what we have to do is look at the fundamentals. A
president can't be a economic forecaster. A president's not going to be any
better an economic forecaster than you are a baseball forecaster. And I'm not
particularly good baseball forecaster this afternoon. (Laughter.)

So the reality is, a president has to work on the fundamentals. What are the
fundamentals? Keep taxes low. Keep regulations moderate. Keep spending under
control. That's an area where we need a lot of help.

And make sure you do something about legal reform, so that our legal system
doesn't -- it's, 2.2 percent of our GDP now is spent on all of these frivolous
lawsuits. It's double any other industrialized nation. We don't get control of
that, that's another way in which we're going to eat up our future. So we've
got a prospect on the Democratic side of overspending, overtaxing,
overregulating and oversuing. And I think you need a Republican alternative to
that, which is an emphasis on the pillars of growth that I mentioned.


 (Laughs, laughter.) God willing. 


 Joe Torre is the best manager in the history of the Yankees, at least in the modern era, so -- and he's my friend. (Laughs.) 


 I cut taxes 23 times when I was mayor of New York City. I believe in tax cuts. I believe in being a supply-sider. I cut the income tax -- I think it was 24 percent. We got 42 percent more revenues. 

I see in The Wall Street Journal this morning an editorial that says: Can we
take the good news that the tax cuts have actually worked to produce about
$500 billion in additional revenue no one ever thought was possible?

So it's something that I believe in from results. I cut taxes by over $9
billion. I didn't cut every tax. You can't possibly cut every tax, as I think
Congressman Tancredo pointed out. You need money for police. You need money
for military. But I cut, I think, as many taxes as you possibly could in that
period of time. And George Will said I ran the most conservative government
from that point of view in the last 40 or 50 years, in the entire country.


 I mean the difference is that under Governor Romney, spending went up in Massachusetts per capita by 8 percent; under me, spending went down by 7 percent. The line-item veto is unconstitutional. I took Bill Clinton to the Supreme Court and beat Bill Clinton. It's unconstitutional. What the heck can you do about that if you're a strict constructionist? 

And finally, the point is that you've got to control taxes, but I did it, he
didn't. I controlled taxes --


 \-- I brought taxes down by 17 percent. Under him, taxes went up 11 percent per capita. I led, he lagged. 


 You got to -- I mean, you have to be honest with people and you can't fool all of the people all of the time. The line-item veto is unconstitutional. You don't get to believe about it. The Supreme Court has ruled on it. So you can bang your head up against a stone wall all you want. I am in favor of a line-item veto, except you have to do it legally. And as the mayor of New York, if I had let President Clinton take $250 million away from the people of my city illegally and unconstitutionally, I wouldn't have been much of a mayor. 


 So I took -- 


 So I took President Clinton to court, and I beat him. And I don't think it's a bad idea to have a Republican presidential candidate who actually has beat President Clinton at something. (Laughter.) (Applause.) 


 Well, I think we're on a verge of going in one direction or another. I mean, for example, if you want to get specific, the four trade deals with Peru, Colombia, Panama, South Korea that are in front of Congress right now, which the Democrats are trying to block, would be good deals for the United States. In three of the four of them, we would actually get to export more than we're importing. (Chuckles.) Why they would want to block this I can't understand. We're already importing about 98 percent -- 90 to 98 percent from those countries. We would actually get to export more, and we would increase our exports. 

So yes, we have to improve our free trade agreements. I think you got to
almost separate them into two different categories. There's economic
protection, and then there's protection for safety, security and legal rights.
And I don't think we've done a particularly good job on the second, and we
have to improve those agreements. But we can't throw out the baby with the
bath water. We can't say because these agreements weren't perfect, because
they have problems, because they have issues, we're going to turn our back on
free trade.

Our percentage of our economy that now depends on exports has gone up from 9
percent to 12 percent; we're a country that depends on exports. And we're also
an entrepreneurial country.

We're a country that should think about all these people that are coming out
of poverty in China and India and elsewhere -- we should think of them as new
customers. We should be thinking about what could we sell to them. Energy
independence. Health care. There's so much we can sell to them. Let's get back
our entrepreneurial spirit rather than having our head down.


 Sure, if they are -- if they are considered to be safe, if they -- if they -- if they pass safety and security clearances. Unfortunately, that deal was done so hastily, it was done so quickly, nobody can tell whether they could or they couldn't. But you just can't rule out foreign companies. There's a whole procedure you go through as to whether or not are they safe, are they secure. We cannot stop doing business with the rest of the world. If we do -- this is one of the reasons our depression became a Great Depression, because we erected such high tariffs that we extended the depression from two or three years to 10 or 11 years. 


 It really depends on exigency of the circumstances and how legitimate it is that it really is an exigent circumstance. It's desirable. It's safer to go to Congress, get approval from Congress. If you're really dealing with exigent circumstance, then the president has to act in the best interests of the country. 

And the point -- I think it was Congressman Paul -- made before, that we've
never had an imminent attack -- I don't know where he was on September 11th.
(Laughter.)


 And there have been -- and since September -- well, I think it was kind of organized in Afghanistan and Pakistan. And if we had known about it, maybe hitting a target there quickly might have helped prevent it. 

In any event, we've had 23 plots since September 11th where Islamic terrorists
are planning to kill Americans, that we've had to stop. So imminent attack is
a possibility and we should be ready for it.

Now, you asked me about Hillary Clinton. At the last Democratic debate,
Hillary Clinton was asked by Tim Russert whether she agreed with my position
on Iran. I like that form of debate, by the way.


 Any time you want to do it that way. Ask her if she agrees with my other positions, as well. (Laughter.) 


 But on Iran -- on Iran -- on Iran what she said was -- she was asked, would you take a strong position that Iran will not be allowed to become nuclear and that we would use a military option if we had to? And she didn't answer the question. Well, you've got to answer the question. The answer is, yes, we would. Iran is a greater danger than Iraq. Iraq cannot be seen in a vacuum. And we have to be willing to use a military option to stop Iran from becoming nuclear. If we're willing to do it, we have a much better chance -- 


 \-- at having sanctions work. 


 You know, the question that Chris asked before about whether or not we would have had to have gone to war in Iraq if we were energy independent or we didn't have to depend on Middle Eastern oil, I mean, that is -- I think the answer is we probably should have and would have gone to war against Saddam Hussein anyway, but maybe not. 

And certainly they'd have less leverage. And I think Iran would be a lot more
of a paper tiger if we were more energy independent. So this is -- and you
could go on into a lot of examples like that.

This is a matter of national security. You've got to support all the
alternatives. There's no magic bullet here -- biofuels, nuclear power. We
haven't licensed a nuclear power plant in 30 years. We haven't had a new
refinery in 30 years. We're on hold. Hydroelectric power, solar power, wind
power, conservation -- we have to support all of these things. We've got to
support them in a positive way, and this is an area in which the federal
government, the president has to treat this like putting a man on the moon. It
is a matter of national security.

One of the ways to win the Islamic terrorist war against us is for us to be
energy independent.


 You don't draw the line anywhere. What you do is you work with people to try to advance all of these technologies. You can't do everything; you can't do long-term damage to our environment. That would be a mistake, that would be an overreaction. You have to make sound judgments, and you have to advance these new technologies. 

Why the heck haven't we licensed a nuclear power plant in 30 years? France is
80 percent nuclear; the United States is 20 percent nuclear, and we're going
down to 15 percent.

It comes because of inaction. It comes because we're not willing to stand up
and we're not willing to stand up sometimes to irrational fears and irrational
special interests.


 How about the vision of a robust, strong America, an America that looks at energy independence from the point of view of not only are we going to develop it for ourselves, but this is exactly what we could be selling to China and to India? They need energy independence more than we do. How about an America that fixes its health care system in the right way, so we can actually sell that abroad? 

The possibilities for America in this global economy are endless if we don't
put a lid on ourselves. Hillary Clinton, the governor mentioned, wants to put
a lid on us. She wants to put a lid on our growth.

We want to give people freedom. I'll give you an example. Hillary the other
day -- remember the Hillary bond program? She's going to give out -- she's
going to give $5,000 to every child born in America -- with her picture it?
(Laughter.) I think, right?


 Okay. Okay. Okay. I challenged her on it. I challenged her and she backed off that. She has a new one today. This one is she's going to give out $1,000 to everybody to set up a 401(k). The problem is, this one costs $5 billion more than the last one. 

So, I don't know, Hillary is filled with endless ways to spend --


 \-- and we're going to have to control that. 


 Sure, I think unions have made a positive contribution. My grandmother was an early member of the United Ladies Garment Workers Union, and I don't know that our family would have gotten out of poverty without that. So I have a great appreciation -- 


 However -- pardon me? 


 Can I sing the song? You don't want me to -- 


 \-- you don't want me to sing -- 


 You do not want me to sing a song. Everybody will run out of this auditorium if I begin singing a song. I have a terrible voice. 

But the reality is that there are good unions, and there are good unions. Our
free economy is like that, and what -- you know, the UAW reached a very
responsible pact the other day. I don't know that you could have gotten a
solution like that if you didn't have a vibrant union. But there are ones that
aren't good unions, and I think the senator is correct -- people should have a
right to either belong to a union or not.


 Pardon me? 


 Sure. I think it's a very, very -- 


 I think it's the new serious area of crime that's emerging. I think that -- first of all, let's separate the economics from the safety and security, like we have to do with free trade agreements; that we should not tax the Internet. There are people who are propsing taxing the Internet. That'd be a really, really big mistake. 

We should police the Internet in that we should make sure that child predators
aren't taking advantage of the Internet, which they seem to be doing.

There are a lot of good state and local law enforcement efforts in that
regard.

I think a task force between the federal government and state and local
governments, in order to police it, to share information, to make sure it
isn't being misused, to make sure it's protected -- I think working with --
one of the businesses that I have familiarity with is a business that I had
some involvement with back in -- we sold it -- but they attack from the
outside Internet systems in order to determine whether they can be penetrated.
They also can set up protections against child predators, against pornography.
Those are the kinds of things that we have to do.

It should -- it's a new area and a growing area of law enforcement. And I
think that there are -- some of the task forces that have been developed have
done some really good work in policing it.


 If it becomes worse, I mean, if this situation becomes worse and we're not getting control over it with the agencies that we presently have -- I'm not big on setting up new agencies. I'm sort of bigger on making the ones that we have work. That's how I reduced crime so effectively in New York. I didn't create a new agency. I made the ones that we have work, work better. 

I think the FBI, I think state and local law enforcement, I think some of
these Internet protection groups that you can track with -- I think they can
do the job. If they can't, well, then you take a look at it.


 Actually, the concern there should be the way to balance that is to sell more things overseas. That's the usual Democratic pessimistic approach to -- you know, how bad things are and how terrible things are. How about we try an optimistic approach? The way to balance the books is sell more overseas. Sell energy independence. Sell health care. Let's do it like a -- in a positive way. 


 Pardon me? 


 (Laughs.) No how, no way. It's not going to happen. It's not going to happen. (Applause.) 


 Come on. 


 Let's stop all this stuff with our head down. London going to replace New York? Give me a break. Of course, London's not going to replace New York. 


 Or is the U.K. going to replace the United States of America? This is the strongest economy on earth. It's the last best hope of humanity. We have been like that. If this generation can't keep it that way, shame on us. This country is the leader in the world. When Congressman Tancredo talks about the immigration problem, how about -- look at it this way. 

What country do millions of people want to come to -- the United States of
America. What country -- I don't care if they bash us all over the world. What
country do they most want to come to? What country do they most want to copy?
What are China and India trying to do? China and India are trying to develop
themselves to be like us, which is why we've got a heck of a lot we can sell
to them, if we just put on our entrepreneurial hats and act like confident
Americans.


 Well, I explain it based on some of the mistakes that we make when we overregulate and we overtax. Our corporate tax rate is the second highest in the world. The president of France wants to lower the corporate tax rate. 

Everybody around the world wants to lower corporate tax rates but the leading
Democratic candidates, who want to raise taxes 25 or 30 percent. (Applause.)
That would be a disaster for this country.


 Well, we've had third party options. I think our two-party system has served us well. I think that generally is the way our democracy operates. I'd like to point out that I think the biggest economic problem we face long-term is our education, our K through 12 education. (Applause.) If we can reform that and change it around choice, I think there's -- the sky's the limit for the United States, and I think there's a looming problem with Canada that you missed. 

If we do HillaryCare or socialized medicine, Canadians will have no place to
go to get their health care. (Laughter, applause.)





