 Thank you very much, Charlie and George, and thanks to all in the audience and who are out there. 

You know, Senator Clinton and I have been running for 15 months now. We've
been traveling across Pennsylvania for at least the last five weeks. And
everywhere I go, what I've been struck by is the core decency and generosity
of people of Pennsylvania and the American people.

But what I've also been struck by is the frustration. You know, I met a
gentleman in Latrobe who had lost his job and was trying to figure out how he
could find the gas money to travel to find a job. And that story, I think, is
typical of what we're seeing all across the country. People are frustrated not
only with jobs moving and incomes being flat, health care being too expensive,
but also that special interests have come to dominate Washington, and they
don't feel like they're being listened to.

I think this election offers us an opportunity to change that, to transform
that frustration into something more hopeful, to bring about real change. And
I'm running for president to ensure that the American people are heard in the
White House. That's my commitment, if the people of Pennsylvania vote for me
and the people of America vote for me.


 Well, I'm happy to start with a response. Look, this has been an extraordinary journey that both Senator Clinton and I have been on and a number of other able candidates. And I think very highly of Senator Clinton's record. But as I've said before, I think it's premature at this point for us to talk about who vice presidential candidates will be because we're still trying to determine who the nominee will be. 

But one thing I'm absolutely certain of is that come August, when we're in
Denver, the Democratic Party will come together, because we have no choice if
we want to deliver on the promises that not only we've made but the founders
made. We are seeing peoples' economic status slipping further and further
behind. We've seen people who have not only lost their jobs but now are at
risk of losing their homes.

We have a sharp contrast in terms of economic policies. John McCain wants to
continue four more years of George Bush policies and, on the foreign policy
front, wants to continue George Bush's foreign policy.

So I'm confident that both Senator Clinton's supporters and Senator Obama's
supporters will be supporting the Democratic nominee when we start engaging in
that general election.


 Yes. 


 Well, I think there's no doubt that I can see how people were offended. It's not the first time that I've made, you know, a statement that was mangled up. It's not going to be the last. 

But let me be very clear about what I meant, because it's something that I've
said in public, it's something that I've said in television, which is that
people are going through very difficult times right now and we are seeing it
all across the country. And that was true even before the current economic
hardships that are stemming from the housing crisis. This is the first
economic expansion that we just completed in which ordinary people's incomes
actually went down, when adjusted for inflation, at the same time as their
costs of everything from health care to gas at the pump have skyrocketed.

And so the point I was making was that when people feel like Washington's not
listening to them, when they're promised year after year, decade after decade,
that their economic situation is going to change, and it doesn't, then
politically they end up focusing on those things that are constant, like
religion.

They end up feeling "This is a place where I can find some refugee. This is
something that I can count on." They end up being much more concerned about
votes around things like guns, where traditions have been passed on from
generation to generation. And those are incredibly important to them.

And yes, what is also true is that wedge issues, hot-button issues, end up
taking prominence in our -- in our politics. And part of the problem is that
when those issues are exploited, we never get to solve the issues that people
really have to get some relief on, whether it's health care or education or
jobs.

So this i something that I've said before. It is something that I will repeat
again. And yes, people are frustrated and angry about it, but what we're
seeing in this election is the opportunity to break through that frustration.
And that's what our campaign has been about, saying that if the American
people get involved and engaged, then we are going to start seeing change. And
that's what makes this election unique.


 Absolutely, and I've said so before. But I too think that I'm the better candidate. (Laughter.) And I don't think that surprises anybody. 

Let me just pick up on a couple of things that Senator Clinton said, though,
because during the course of the last few days, you know, she's said I'm
elitist, out of touch, condescending. Let me be absolutely clear. It would be
pretty hard for me to be condescending towards people of faith, since I'm a
person of faith and have done more than most other campaigns in reaching out
specifically to people of faith, and have written about how Democrats make an
error when they don't show up and speak directly to people's faith, because I
think we can get those votes, and I have in the past.

The same is true with respect to gun owners. I have large numbers of sportsmen
and gun owners in my home state, and they have supported me precisely because
I have listened to them, and I know them well.

So the problem that we have in our politics, which is fairly typical, is that
you take one person's statement, if it's not properly phrased, and you just
beat it to death. And that's what Senator Clinton's been doing over the last
four days. And I understand that.

That's politics, and I expect to have to go through this -- this process.

But I do think it's important to recognize that it's not helping that person
who's sitting at the kitchen table who is trying to figure out how to pay the
bills at the end of the month.

And Senator Clinton's right. She has gone through this. You know, I recall
when back in 1992, when she made a statement about how, what do you expect,
should I be at home baking cookies?

And people attacked her for being elitist and this and that. And I remember
watching that on TV and saying, well, that's not who she is; that's not what
she believes; that's not what she meant. And I'm sure that that's how she felt
as well.

But the problem is that that's the kind of politics that we've been accustomed
to. And I think Senator Clinton learned the wrong lesson from it, because
she's adopting the same tactics.

What the American people want are not distractions. They want to figure out,
how are we actually going to deliver on health care; how are we going to
deliver better jobs for people; how are we going to improve their incomes; how
are we going to send them to college?

That's what we have to focus on. And yes, they are in part frustrated and
angry, because this is what passes for our politics in terms -- instead of
figuring out, how do we build coalitions to actually move things forward?


 Well -- 


 Well, understand that I hadn't seen the remarks that ended up playing on youTube repeatedly. This was a set of remarks that had been quoted in Rolling Stone Magazine and we looked at them and I thought that they would be a distraction since he had just put them forward. 

But, Charlie, I've discussed this extensively. Reverend Wright is somebody who
made controversial statements but they were not of the sort that we saw that
offended so many Americans. And that's why I specifically said that these
comments were objectionable; they're not comments that I believe in.

And I disassociated myself with them.

What I also said was, the church and the body of Reverend Wright's work, over
the course of 30 years, were not represented in those snippets that were shown
on television, and that the church has done outstanding work in ministries on
HIV/AIDS, prison ministries, providing people with the kind of comfort that we
expect in our churches.

And so what I think I tried to do in the speech here at the Constitution
Center was speak to a broader context, which is that there is anger in the
African American community that sometimes gets expressed, whether in the
barbershop or in the church.

That's true not just in the African American community. That's true in other
communities as well. But what we have the opportunity to do is to move beyond
it. And that's what I think my candidacy represents.

And Senator Clinton mentioned earlier that we have to connect with people.
That's exactly what we've done throughout this campaign.

The reason we've attracted new people into the process, the reason we've
generated so much excitement, the reason that we have been so successful in so
many states across the country, bridging racial lines, bridging some of the
old divisions, is because people recognize that unless we do, then we're not
going to be able to deliver on the promises that people hear every 4 years,
every 8 years, every 12 years.

And it's my job in this campaign to try to move beyond some of those
divisions, because when we are unified, there is nothing that we cannot
tackle.


 Well, let me just respond to -- to two things. Absolutely many of these remarks were objectionable. I've already said that I didn't hear them, because I wasn't in church that day. I didn't learn about those statements until much later. 

But --


 But that was on -- that was on something entirely different, Charlie. That -- that was on a different statement. And I think that what Senator Clinton referred to was extremely offensive, to me and a lot of people. 

But what I should also point out is that Senator Clinton's former pastor, I
think, publicly talked about how Reverend Wright was being caricatured and
that in fact this is somebody who had maintained an extraordinary ministry for
many years.

And so there are two important points: Number one, I wasn't aware of all these
statements, and I can understand how people would take offense; but number
two, the church is a community that extends beyond the pastor and that church
has done outstanding work for many, many years.

The third point I guess I would make is once again that unless we can bridge
some of these divides we're not going to solve problems in this country. And
what my entire body of work over the last 20 years has been devoted to is
getting blacks, whites, Hispanics, Asians, Native Americans, young, old to
work together, starting when I was a community organizer. And my own life
embodies that diversity. That's what America's about and that's what this
campaign has been about.


 You know, George, look, if it's not this, then it would be something else. I promise you, if Senator Clinton got the nomination, there will be a whole bunch of video clips about other things. In a general election, we know that there are going to be all kinds of attacks launched and leveled. There have been quite a few leveled in this primary campaign. 

And I have confidence in the American people that when you talk to the
American people honestly and directly about what I believe in, what my plans
are on health care, on energy, when they see my track record of the work that
I've done on behalf of people who really need help, I have absolute confidence
that they can rally behind my campaign.

And, you know, the notion that somehow that the American people are going to
be distracted once again by comments not made by me but by somebody who is
associated with me, that I have disowned, I think doesn't give the American
people enough credit.


 The comments, comments that I've disowned. Then that is not something that I think -- 


 This is somebody who's a former Marine. And so I have -- I believe that he loves this country, but I also believe that he's somebody who, because of the experiences he's had over the course of a lifetime, is also angry about the injustices that he's seen. 


 Well, look, I think that Senator Clinton has a strong record to run on. She wouldn't be here if she didn't. And you know, I haven't commented on the issue of Bosnia. You know, I -- 


 Of course, but -- 


 Because we're asked about it. 

But look, the fact of the matter is, is that both of us are working as hard as
we can to make sure that we're delivering a message to the American people
about what we would do as president.

Sometimes that message is going to be imperfectly delivered, because we are
recorded every minute of every day. And I think Senator Clinton deserves, you
know, the right to make some errors once in a while. I'm -- obviously, I make
some as well.

I think what's important is to make sure that we don't get so obsessed with
gaffes that we lose sight of the fact that this is a defining moment in our
history. We are going to be tackling some of the biggest issues that any
president has dealt with in the last 40 years. Our economy is teetering not
just on the edge of recession, but potentially worse. Our foreign policy is in
a shambles. We are involved in two wars. People's incomes have not gone up,
and their costs have. And we're seeing greater income inequality now than any
time since the 1920s.

In those circumstances, for us to be obsessed with this -- these kinds of
errors I think is a mistake. And that's not what our campaign has been about.

What our campaign has been about is offering some specific solutions to how we
move these issues forward and identifying the need to change the culture in
Washington, which we haven't talked at all about, but that has blocked real
reform decade after decade after decade. That, I think, is the job of the next
president of the United States.

That's what I intend to do. That's why I'm running.


 Well, look, I revere the American flag, and I would not be running for president if I did not revere this country. This is -- I would not be standing here if it wasn't for this country. 

And I've said this -- again, there's no other country in which my story is
even possible; somebody who was born to a teenage mom, raised by a single
mother and grandparents from small towns in Kansas, you know, who was able to
get an education and rise to the point where I can run for the highest office
in the land. I could not help but love this country for all that it's given
me.

And so what I've tried to do is to show my patriotism by how I treat veterans
when I'm working in the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee; by making sure that
I'm speaking forcefully about how we need to bring this war in Iraq to a
close, because I think it is not serving our national security well and it's
not serving our military families and our troops well; talking about how we
need to restore a sense of economic fairness to this country because that's
what this country has always been about, is providing upward mobility and
ladders to opportunity for all Americans. That's what I love about this
country. And so I will continue to fight for those issues.

And I am absolutely confident that during the general election that when I'm
in a debate with John McCain, people are not going to be questioning my
patriotism, they are going to be questioning how can you make people's lives a
little bit better.

And let me just make one last point on this issue of the flag pin. As you
noted, I wore one yesterday when a veteran handed it to me, who himself was
disabled and works on behalf of disabled veterans. I have never said that I
don't wear flag pins or refuse to wear flag pins. This is the kind of
manufactured issue that our politics has become obsessed with and, once again,
distracts us from what should be my job when I'm commander in chief, which is
going to be figuring out how we get our troops out of Iraq and how we actually
make our economy better for the American people.


 George, but this is an example of what I'm talking about. 

This is a guy who lives in my neighborhood, who's a professor of English in
Chicago, who I know and who I have not received some official endorsement
from. He's not somebody who I exchange ideas from on a regular basis.

And the notion that somehow as a consequence of me knowing somebody who
engaged in detestable acts 40 years ago when I was 8 years old, somehow
reflects on me and my values, doesn't make much sense, George.

The fact is, is that I'm also friendly with Tom Coburn, one of the most
conservative Republicans in the United States Senate, who during his campaign
once said that it might be appropriate to apply the death penalty to those who
carried out abortions.

Do I need to apologize for Mr. Coburn's statements? Because I certainly don't
agree with those either.

So this kind of game, in which anybody who I know, regardless of how flimsy
the relationship is, is somehow -- somehow their ideas could be attributed to
me -- I think the American people are smarter than that. They're not going to
suggest somehow that that is reflective of my views, because it obviously
isn't.


 I'm going to have to respond to this just really quickly, but by Senator Clinton's own vetting standards, I don't think she would make it, since President Clinton pardoned or commuted the sentences of two members of the Weather Underground, which I think is a slightly more significant act than me -- 


 \-- than me serving on a board with somebody for actions that he did 40 years ago. 

Look, there is no doubt that the Republicans will attack either of us. What
I've been able to display during the course of this primary is that I can take
a punch. I've taken some pretty good ones from Senator Clinton. And I don't
begrudge her that. That's part of what the political contest is about.

I am looking forward to having a debate with John McCain, and I think every
poll indicates that I am doing just as well, if not better, in pulling
together the coalition that will defeat John McCain.

And when it comes to November, and people are going into the polling place,
they're going to be asking, are we going to go through four more years of
George Bush economic policies; are we going to go through four more years of
George Bush foreign policy?

And if we as Democrats and if I as the nominee have put forward a clear vision
for how we're going to move the country forward, deal with issues like energy
dependence, lower gas prices, provide health care, get our troops out of Iraq,
that is a debate that I'm happy to have and a debate that I'm confident I can
win.


 Because the commander in chief sets the mission, Charlie. That's not the role of the generals. And one of the things that's been interesting about the president's approach lately has been to say, well, I'm just taking cues from General Petraeus. 

Well, the president sets the mission. The general and our troops carry out
that mission. And unfortunately we have had a bad mission, set by our civilian
leadership, which our military has performed brilliantly. But it is time for
us to set a strategy that is going to make the American people safer.

Now, I will always listen to our commanders on the ground with respect to
tactics. Once I've given them a new mission, that we are going to proceed
deliberately in an orderly fashion out of Iraq and we are going to have our
combat troops out, we will not have permanent bases there, once I've provided
that mission, if they come to me and want to adjust tactics, then I will
certainly take their recommendations into consideration; but ultimately the
buck stops with me as the commander in chief.

And what I have to look at is not just the situation in Iraq, but the fact
that we continue to see al Qaeda getting stronger in Afghanistan and in
Pakistan, we continue to see anti-American sentiment fanned all cross the
Middle East, we are overstretched in a way -- we do not have a strategic
reserve at this point. If there was another crisis that was taking place, we
would not have a brigade that we could send to deal with that crisis that
isn't already scheduled to be deployed in Iraq. That is not sustainable.
That's not smart national security policy, and it's going to change when I'm
president.


 Well, our first step should be to keep nuclear weapons out of the hands of the Iranians, and that has to be one of our top priorities. And I will make it one of our top priorities when I'm president of the United States. 

I have said I will do whatever is required to prevent the Iranians from
obtaining nuclear weapons. I believe that that includes direct talks with the
Iranians where we are laying out very clearly for them, here are the issues
that we find unacceptable, not only development of nuclear weapons but also
funding terrorist organizations like Hamas and Hezbollah, as well as their
anti-Israel rhetoric and threats towards Israel. I believe that we can offer
them carrots and sticks, but we've got to directly engage and make absolutely
clear to them what our posture is.

Now, my belief is that they should also know that I will take no options off
the table when it comes to preventing them from using nuclear weapons or
obtaining nuclear weapons, and that would include any threats directed at
Israel or any of our allies in the region.


 As I've said before, I think it is very important that Iran understands that an attack on Israel is an attack on our strongest ally in the region, one that we -- one whose security we consider paramount, and that -- that would be an act of aggression that we -- that I would -- that I would consider an attack that is unacceptable, and the United States would take appropriate action. 


 Well, I not only have pledged not to raise their taxes, I've been the first candidate in this race to specifically say I would cut their taxes. 

And one of the centerpieces of my economic plan would be to say that we are
going to offset the payroll tax, the most regressive of our taxes, so that
families who are earning -- who are middle-income individuals making $75,000 a
year or less, that they would get a tax break so that families would see up to
a thousand dollars worth of relief.

Senior citizens who have earnings of less than $50,000 wouldn't have to pay
income tax on their Social Security. And middle-class homeowners who currently
don't itemize on their tax filings, they would be able to get a deduction the
same way that wealthy individuals do.

Now, here's the reason why that's important. We have seen wages and incomes
flat or declining at a time when costs have gone up. And one of the things
that we've learned from George Bush's economic policies, which John McCain now
wants to follow, is that pain trickles up. And so, partly because people have
been strapped and have had a tough time making ends meet, we're now seeing a
deteriorating housing market.

That's also as a consequence of the lack of oversight and regulation of these
banks and financial institutions that gave loans that they shouldn't have. And
part of it has to do with the fact that you had $185 million by mortgage
lenders spent on lobbyists and special interests who were writing these laws.

So the rules in Washington -- the tax code has been written on behalf of the
well connected. Our trade laws have -- same thing has happened. And part of
how we're going to be able to deliver on middle-class tax relief is to change
how business is done in Washington. And that's been a central focus of our
campaign.


 Well, it depends on how you calculate it. But it would be between 200 and 250,000. 


 Right. 


 Right. 


 Well, Charlie, what I've said is that I would look at raising the capital gains tax for purposes of fairness. We saw an article today which showed that the top 50 hedge fund managers made $29 billion last year -- $29 billion for 50 individuals. And part of what has happened is that those who are able to work the stock market and amass huge fortunes on capital gains are paying a lower tax rate than their secretaries. That's not fair. 

And what I want is not oppressive taxation. I want businesses to thrive and I
want people to be rewarded for their success. But what I also want to make
sure is that our tax system is fair and that we are able to finance health
care for Americans who currently don't have it and that we're able to invest
in our infrastructure and invest in our schools.

And you can't do that for free, and you can't take out a credit card from the
Bank of China in the name of our children and our grandchildren and then say
that you're cutting taxes, which is essentially what John McCain has been
talking about. And that is irresponsible.

You know, I believe in the principle that you pay as you go, and you don't
propose tax cuts unless you are closing other tax breaks for individuals. And
you don't increase spending unless you're eliminating some spending or you're
finding some new revenue. That's how we got an additional $4 trillion worth of
debt under George Bush. That is helping to undermine our economy, and it's
going to change when I'm president of the United States.


 Well, that might happen or it might not. It depends on what's happening on Wall Street and how business is going. I think the biggest problem that we've got on Wall Street right now is the fact that we've got a housing crisis that this president has not been attentive to and that it took John McCain three tries before he got it right. 

And if we can stabilize that market and we can get credit flowing again, then
I think we'll see stocks do well, and once again I think we can generate the
revenue that we need to run this government and hopefully to pay down some of
this debt.


 Well, Charlie, I just have to respond real quickly to Senator Clinton's last comment. What I have proposed is that we raise the cap on the payroll tax, because right now millionaires and billionaires don't have to pay beyond $97,000 a year. 

That's where it's kept. Now most firefighters, most teachers, you know,
they're not making over $100,000 a year. In fact, only 6 percent of the
population does. And I've also said that I'd be willing to look at exempting
people who are making slightly above that.

But understand the alternative is that because we're going to have fewer
workers to more retirees, if we don't do anything on Social Security, then
those benefits will effectively be cut, because we'll be running out of money.


 Well, no, look, let me -- let me finish my point here, Charlie. Senator Clinton just said she certainly wouldn't do this; this was a bad idea. In Iowa she, when she was outside of camera range, said to an individual there she'd certainly consider the idea. And then that was recorded, and she apparently wasn't aware that it was being recorded. 

So this is an option that I would strongly consider, because the alternatives,
like raising the retirement age, or cutting benefits, or raising the payroll
tax on everybody, including people who make less than $97,000 a year --


 \-- those are not good policy options. 


 And that's -- and that's -- and that's why I've said, Charlie, that I would look at potentially exempting those who are in between. 

But the point is, we're going to have to capture some revenue in order to
stabilize the Social Security system. You can't -- you can't get something for
nothing. And if we care about Social Security, which I do, and if we are firm
in our commitment to make sure that it's going to be there for the next
generation, and not just for our generation, then we have an obligation to
figure out how to stabilize the system.

And I think we should be honest in presenting our ideas in terms of how we're
going to do that and not just say that we're going to form a commission and
try to solve the problem some other way.


 That commission raised the retirement age, Charlie, and also raised the payroll tax. And so Senator Clinton, if she -- she can't have it both ways. You can't come at me for proposing a solution that will save Social Security without burdening middle- income Americans, and then suggest that somehow she's got a magic solution. 


 Well, Charlie, I confess I obviously haven't listened to the briefs and looked at all the evidence. 

As a general principle, I believe that the Constitution confers an individual
right to bear arms. But just because you have an individual right does not
mean that the state or local government can't constrain the exercise of that
right, and, you know, in the same way that we have a right to private property
but local governments can establish zoning ordinances that determine how you
can use it.

And I think that it is going to be important for us to reconcile what are two
realities in this country.

There's the reality of gun ownership and the tradition of gun ownership that's
passed on from generation to generation. You know, when you listen to people
who have hunted, and they talk about the fact that they went hunting with
their fathers or their mothers, then that is something that is deeply
important to them and, culturally, they care about deeply.

But you also have the reality of what's happening here in Philadelphia and
what's happening in Chicago.

And...


 No, my writing wasn't on that particular questionnaire, Charlie. As I said, I have never favored an all-out ban on handguns. 

What I think we can provide is common-sense approaches to the issue of illegal
guns that are ending up on the streets. We can make sure that criminals don't
have guns in their hands. We can make certain that those who are mentally
deranged are not getting a hold of handguns. We can trace guns that have been
used in crimes to unscrupulous gun dealers that may be selling to straw
purchasers and dumping them on the streets.

The point is, is that what we have to do is get beyond the politics of this
issue and figure out what, in fact, is working.

Look, in my hometown of Chicago, on the south side of Chicago, we've had 34
gun deaths last year of Chicago public school children.

And I think that most law-abiding gun owners all across America would
recognize that it is perfectly appropriate for local communities and states
and the federal government to try to figure out, how do we stop that kind of
killing?


 Well, I think that the basic principle that should guide discussions not just on affirmative action but how we are admitting young people to college generally is, how do we make sure that we're providing ladders of opportunity for people? How do we make sure that every child in America has a decent shot in pursuing their dreams? 

And race is still a factor in our society. And I think that for universities
and other institutions to say, you know, we're going to take into account the
hardships that somebody has experienced because they're black or Latino or
because they're women --


 I think that's something that they can take into account, but it can only be in the context of looking at the whole situation of the young person. So if they look at my child and they say, you know, Malia and Sasha, they've had a pretty good deal, then that shouldn't be factored in. On the other hand, if there's a young white person who has been working hard, struggling, and has overcome great odds, that's something that should be taken into account. 

So I still believe in affirmative action as a means of overcoming both
historic and potentially current discrimination, but I think that it can't be
a quota system and it can't be something that is simply applied without
looking at the whole person, whether that person is black or white or
Hispanic, male or female.

What we want to do is make sure that people who have been locked out of
opportunity are going to be able to walk through those doors of opportunity in
the future.


 Well, you're right. And that's why people are cynical, because decade after decade, we talk about energy policy or we talk about health care policy, and through Democratic and Republican administrations, nothing gets done. 

Now, I think many of the steps that Senator Clinton outlined are similar to
the plans that we talked about. It is absolutely true that we've got to
investigate potential price gouging or market manipulation. I have strongly
called for a windfall profits tax that can provide both consumers relief and
also invest in renewable energies.

I think that long term, we're going to have to raise fuel efficiency standards
on cars, because the only way that we're going to be able to reduce gas prices
is if we reduce demand. You've still got a billion people in China, and maybe
700 million in India, who still want cars. And so the long-term trajectory is
that we're going to have to get serious about increasing our fuel efficiency
standards and investing in new technologies.

That's something I'm committed to doing. I've talked about spending $150
billion over 10 years in an Apollo Project, a Manhattan Project to create the
alternative energy strategies that will work not only for this generation but
for the next.


 Well, you know, I think that having the advice and counsel of all former presidents is important. I'm probably more likely to advice of the current president's father than president himself because I think that when you look back at George H.W. Bush's foreign policy, it was a wise foreign policy. 

And how we executed the Gulf War, how we managed the transition out of the
Cold War, I think, is an example of how we can get bipartisan agreement. I
don't think the Democrats have a monopoly on good ideas. I think that there
are a lot of thoughtful Republicans out there.

The problem is, we've been locked in a divided politics for so long that we've
stopped listening to each other. And I think that this president in particular
has fed those divisions. That's something that we've tried to end in this
campaign, and I think we're being successful.


 Well, when we started this campaign 15 months ago, it was based on a couple of simple principles: number one, that we were in a defining moment in our history. Our nation's at war. Our planet's in peril. Our economy is in a shambles. And most importantly, the American people have lost trust in their government, not just Democrats but independents and Republicans who've been disillusioned about promises that have been made election after election, decade after decade. 

And the bet I was making was a bet on the American people; that they were
tired of a politics that was about tearing about each other down, but wanted a
politics that was about lifting the country up; that they didn't want spin and
PR out of their elected officials, they wanted an honest conversation.

And most importantly, I believe that change does not happen from the top down,
it happens from the bottom up. And that's why we decided we weren't going to
take PAC money or money from federal registered lobbyists, that we were not
going to be subject to special- interest influence, but instead were going to
enlist the American people in a project of changing this country.

And during the course of these last 15 months, my bet's paid off because the
American people have responded in record numbers, and not just people who are
accustomed to participating, but people who haven't participated in years. I
talked to a woman here in Pennsylvania, 70 years old, she whispered to me,
"I've never voted before, but I'm going to vote in this election."

And so my point to the super delegates would be that if we're going to deliver
on health care for every American, improve our schools, deliver on jobs, then
it's going to be absolutely vital we form a new political coalition in this
country. That's what we've been doing in this campaign, and that's what I'm
going to do when I'm president of the United States of America.




 Thank you very much, Charlie and George, and thanks to all in the audience and who are out there. 

You know, Senator Clinton and I have been running for 15 months now. We've
been traveling across Pennsylvania for at least the last five weeks. And
everywhere I go, what I've been struck by is the core decency and generosity
of people of Pennsylvania and the American people.

But what I've also been struck by is the frustration. You know, I met a
gentleman in Latrobe who had lost his job and was trying to figure out how he
could find the gas money to travel to find a job. And that story, I think, is
typical of what we're seeing all across the country. People are frustrated not
only with jobs moving and incomes being flat, health care being too expensive,
but also that special interests have come to dominate Washington, and they
don't feel like they're being listened to.

I think this election offers us an opportunity to change that, to transform
that frustration into something more hopeful, to bring about real change. And
I'm running for president to ensure that the American people are heard in the
White House. That's my commitment, if the people of Pennsylvania vote for me
and the people of America vote for me.


 Well, I'm happy to start with a response. Look, this has been an extraordinary journey that both Senator Clinton and I have been on and a number of other able candidates. And I think very highly of Senator Clinton's record. But as I've said before, I think it's premature at this point for us to talk about who vice presidential candidates will be because we're still trying to determine who the nominee will be. 

But one thing I'm absolutely certain of is that come August, when we're in
Denver, the Democratic Party will come together, because we have no choice if
we want to deliver on the promises that not only we've made but the founders
made. We are seeing peoples' economic status slipping further and further
behind. We've seen people who have not only lost their jobs but now are at
risk of losing their homes.

We have a sharp contrast in terms of economic policies. John McCain wants to
continue four more years of George Bush policies and, on the foreign policy
front, wants to continue George Bush's foreign policy.

So I'm confident that both Senator Clinton's supporters and Senator Obama's
supporters will be supporting the Democratic nominee when we start engaging in
that general election.


 Yes. 


 Well, I think there's no doubt that I can see how people were offended. It's not the first time that I've made, you know, a statement that was mangled up. It's not going to be the last. 

But let me be very clear about what I meant, because it's something that I've
said in public, it's something that I've said in television, which is that
people are going through very difficult times right now and we are seeing it
all across the country. And that was true even before the current economic
hardships that are stemming from the housing crisis. This is the first
economic expansion that we just completed in which ordinary people's incomes
actually went down, when adjusted for inflation, at the same time as their
costs of everything from health care to gas at the pump have skyrocketed.

And so the point I was making was that when people feel like Washington's not
listening to them, when they're promised year after year, decade after decade,
that their economic situation is going to change, and it doesn't, then
politically they end up focusing on those things that are constant, like
religion.

They end up feeling "This is a place where I can find some refugee. This is
something that I can count on." They end up being much more concerned about
votes around things like guns, where traditions have been passed on from
generation to generation. And those are incredibly important to them.

And yes, what is also true is that wedge issues, hot-button issues, end up
taking prominence in our -- in our politics. And part of the problem is that
when those issues are exploited, we never get to solve the issues that people
really have to get some relief on, whether it's health care or education or
jobs.

So this i something that I've said before. It is something that I will repeat
again. And yes, people are frustrated and angry about it, but what we're
seeing in this election is the opportunity to break through that frustration.
And that's what our campaign has been about, saying that if the American
people get involved and engaged, then we are going to start seeing change. And
that's what makes this election unique.


 Absolutely, and I've said so before. But I too think that I'm the better candidate. (Laughter.) And I don't think that surprises anybody. 

Let me just pick up on a couple of things that Senator Clinton said, though,
because during the course of the last few days, you know, she's said I'm
elitist, out of touch, condescending. Let me be absolutely clear. It would be
pretty hard for me to be condescending towards people of faith, since I'm a
person of faith and have done more than most other campaigns in reaching out
specifically to people of faith, and have written about how Democrats make an
error when they don't show up and speak directly to people's faith, because I
think we can get those votes, and I have in the past.

The same is true with respect to gun owners. I have large numbers of sportsmen
and gun owners in my home state, and they have supported me precisely because
I have listened to them, and I know them well.

So the problem that we have in our politics, which is fairly typical, is that
you take one person's statement, if it's not properly phrased, and you just
beat it to death. And that's what Senator Clinton's been doing over the last
four days. And I understand that.

That's politics, and I expect to have to go through this -- this process.

But I do think it's important to recognize that it's not helping that person
who's sitting at the kitchen table who is trying to figure out how to pay the
bills at the end of the month.

And Senator Clinton's right. She has gone through this. You know, I recall
when back in 1992, when she made a statement about how, what do you expect,
should I be at home baking cookies?

And people attacked her for being elitist and this and that. And I remember
watching that on TV and saying, well, that's not who she is; that's not what
she believes; that's not what she meant. And I'm sure that that's how she felt
as well.

But the problem is that that's the kind of politics that we've been accustomed
to. And I think Senator Clinton learned the wrong lesson from it, because
she's adopting the same tactics.

What the American people want are not distractions. They want to figure out,
how are we actually going to deliver on health care; how are we going to
deliver better jobs for people; how are we going to improve their incomes; how
are we going to send them to college?

That's what we have to focus on. And yes, they are in part frustrated and
angry, because this is what passes for our politics in terms -- instead of
figuring out, how do we build coalitions to actually move things forward?


 Well -- 


 Well, understand that I hadn't seen the remarks that ended up playing on youTube repeatedly. This was a set of remarks that had been quoted in Rolling Stone Magazine and we looked at them and I thought that they would be a distraction since he had just put them forward. 

But, Charlie, I've discussed this extensively. Reverend Wright is somebody who
made controversial statements but they were not of the sort that we saw that
offended so many Americans. And that's why I specifically said that these
comments were objectionable; they're not comments that I believe in.

And I disassociated myself with them.

What I also said was, the church and the body of Reverend Wright's work, over
the course of 30 years, were not represented in those snippets that were shown
on television, and that the church has done outstanding work in ministries on
HIV/AIDS, prison ministries, providing people with the kind of comfort that we
expect in our churches.

And so what I think I tried to do in the speech here at the Constitution
Center was speak to a broader context, which is that there is anger in the
African American community that sometimes gets expressed, whether in the
barbershop or in the church.

That's true not just in the African American community. That's true in other
communities as well. But what we have the opportunity to do is to move beyond
it. And that's what I think my candidacy represents.

And Senator Clinton mentioned earlier that we have to connect with people.
That's exactly what we've done throughout this campaign.

The reason we've attracted new people into the process, the reason we've
generated so much excitement, the reason that we have been so successful in so
many states across the country, bridging racial lines, bridging some of the
old divisions, is because people recognize that unless we do, then we're not
going to be able to deliver on the promises that people hear every 4 years,
every 8 years, every 12 years.

And it's my job in this campaign to try to move beyond some of those
divisions, because when we are unified, there is nothing that we cannot
tackle.


 Well, let me just respond to -- to two things. Absolutely many of these remarks were objectionable. I've already said that I didn't hear them, because I wasn't in church that day. I didn't learn about those statements until much later. 

But --


 But that was on -- that was on something entirely different, Charlie. That -- that was on a different statement. And I think that what Senator Clinton referred to was extremely offensive, to me and a lot of people. 

But what I should also point out is that Senator Clinton's former pastor, I
think, publicly talked about how Reverend Wright was being caricatured and
that in fact this is somebody who had maintained an extraordinary ministry for
many years.

And so there are two important points: Number one, I wasn't aware of all these
statements, and I can understand how people would take offense; but number
two, the church is a community that extends beyond the pastor and that church
has done outstanding work for many, many years.

The third point I guess I would make is once again that unless we can bridge
some of these divides we're not going to solve problems in this country. And
what my entire body of work over the last 20 years has been devoted to is
getting blacks, whites, Hispanics, Asians, Native Americans, young, old to
work together, starting when I was a community organizer. And my own life
embodies that diversity. That's what America's about and that's what this
campaign has been about.


 You know, George, look, if it's not this, then it would be something else. I promise you, if Senator Clinton got the nomination, there will be a whole bunch of video clips about other things. In a general election, we know that there are going to be all kinds of attacks launched and leveled. There have been quite a few leveled in this primary campaign. 

And I have confidence in the American people that when you talk to the
American people honestly and directly about what I believe in, what my plans
are on health care, on energy, when they see my track record of the work that
I've done on behalf of people who really need help, I have absolute confidence
that they can rally behind my campaign.

And, you know, the notion that somehow that the American people are going to
be distracted once again by comments not made by me but by somebody who is
associated with me, that I have disowned, I think doesn't give the American
people enough credit.


 The comments, comments that I've disowned. Then that is not something that I think -- 


 This is somebody who's a former Marine. And so I have -- I believe that he loves this country, but I also believe that he's somebody who, because of the experiences he's had over the course of a lifetime, is also angry about the injustices that he's seen. 


 Well, look, I think that Senator Clinton has a strong record to run on. She wouldn't be here if she didn't. And you know, I haven't commented on the issue of Bosnia. You know, I -- 


 Of course, but -- 


 Because we're asked about it. 

But look, the fact of the matter is, is that both of us are working as hard as
we can to make sure that we're delivering a message to the American people
about what we would do as president.

Sometimes that message is going to be imperfectly delivered, because we are
recorded every minute of every day. And I think Senator Clinton deserves, you
know, the right to make some errors once in a while. I'm -- obviously, I make
some as well.

I think what's important is to make sure that we don't get so obsessed with
gaffes that we lose sight of the fact that this is a defining moment in our
history. We are going to be tackling some of the biggest issues that any
president has dealt with in the last 40 years. Our economy is teetering not
just on the edge of recession, but potentially worse. Our foreign policy is in
a shambles. We are involved in two wars. People's incomes have not gone up,
and their costs have. And we're seeing greater income inequality now than any
time since the 1920s.

In those circumstances, for us to be obsessed with this -- these kinds of
errors I think is a mistake. And that's not what our campaign has been about.

What our campaign has been about is offering some specific solutions to how we
move these issues forward and identifying the need to change the culture in
Washington, which we haven't talked at all about, but that has blocked real
reform decade after decade after decade. That, I think, is the job of the next
president of the United States.

That's what I intend to do. That's why I'm running.


 Well, look, I revere the American flag, and I would not be running for president if I did not revere this country. This is -- I would not be standing here if it wasn't for this country. 

And I've said this -- again, there's no other country in which my story is
even possible; somebody who was born to a teenage mom, raised by a single
mother and grandparents from small towns in Kansas, you know, who was able to
get an education and rise to the point where I can run for the highest office
in the land. I could not help but love this country for all that it's given
me.

And so what I've tried to do is to show my patriotism by how I treat veterans
when I'm working in the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee; by making sure that
I'm speaking forcefully about how we need to bring this war in Iraq to a
close, because I think it is not serving our national security well and it's
not serving our military families and our troops well; talking about how we
need to restore a sense of economic fairness to this country because that's
what this country has always been about, is providing upward mobility and
ladders to opportunity for all Americans. That's what I love about this
country. And so I will continue to fight for those issues.

And I am absolutely confident that during the general election that when I'm
in a debate with John McCain, people are not going to be questioning my
patriotism, they are going to be questioning how can you make people's lives a
little bit better.

And let me just make one last point on this issue of the flag pin. As you
noted, I wore one yesterday when a veteran handed it to me, who himself was
disabled and works on behalf of disabled veterans. I have never said that I
don't wear flag pins or refuse to wear flag pins. This is the kind of
manufactured issue that our politics has become obsessed with and, once again,
distracts us from what should be my job when I'm commander in chief, which is
going to be figuring out how we get our troops out of Iraq and how we actually
make our economy better for the American people.


 George, but this is an example of what I'm talking about. 

This is a guy who lives in my neighborhood, who's a professor of English in
Chicago, who I know and who I have not received some official endorsement
from. He's not somebody who I exchange ideas from on a regular basis.

And the notion that somehow as a consequence of me knowing somebody who
engaged in detestable acts 40 years ago when I was 8 years old, somehow
reflects on me and my values, doesn't make much sense, George.

The fact is, is that I'm also friendly with Tom Coburn, one of the most
conservative Republicans in the United States Senate, who during his campaign
once said that it might be appropriate to apply the death penalty to those who
carried out abortions.

Do I need to apologize for Mr. Coburn's statements? Because I certainly don't
agree with those either.

So this kind of game, in which anybody who I know, regardless of how flimsy
the relationship is, is somehow -- somehow their ideas could be attributed to
me -- I think the American people are smarter than that. They're not going to
suggest somehow that that is reflective of my views, because it obviously
isn't.


 I'm going to have to respond to this just really quickly, but by Senator Clinton's own vetting standards, I don't think she would make it, since President Clinton pardoned or commuted the sentences of two members of the Weather Underground, which I think is a slightly more significant act than me -- 


 \-- than me serving on a board with somebody for actions that he did 40 years ago. 

Look, there is no doubt that the Republicans will attack either of us. What
I've been able to display during the course of this primary is that I can take
a punch. I've taken some pretty good ones from Senator Clinton. And I don't
begrudge her that. That's part of what the political contest is about.

I am looking forward to having a debate with John McCain, and I think every
poll indicates that I am doing just as well, if not better, in pulling
together the coalition that will defeat John McCain.

And when it comes to November, and people are going into the polling place,
they're going to be asking, are we going to go through four more years of
George Bush economic policies; are we going to go through four more years of
George Bush foreign policy?

And if we as Democrats and if I as the nominee have put forward a clear vision
for how we're going to move the country forward, deal with issues like energy
dependence, lower gas prices, provide health care, get our troops out of Iraq,
that is a debate that I'm happy to have and a debate that I'm confident I can
win.


 Because the commander in chief sets the mission, Charlie. That's not the role of the generals. And one of the things that's been interesting about the president's approach lately has been to say, well, I'm just taking cues from General Petraeus. 

Well, the president sets the mission. The general and our troops carry out
that mission. And unfortunately we have had a bad mission, set by our civilian
leadership, which our military has performed brilliantly. But it is time for
us to set a strategy that is going to make the American people safer.

Now, I will always listen to our commanders on the ground with respect to
tactics. Once I've given them a new mission, that we are going to proceed
deliberately in an orderly fashion out of Iraq and we are going to have our
combat troops out, we will not have permanent bases there, once I've provided
that mission, if they come to me and want to adjust tactics, then I will
certainly take their recommendations into consideration; but ultimately the
buck stops with me as the commander in chief.

And what I have to look at is not just the situation in Iraq, but the fact
that we continue to see al Qaeda getting stronger in Afghanistan and in
Pakistan, we continue to see anti-American sentiment fanned all cross the
Middle East, we are overstretched in a way -- we do not have a strategic
reserve at this point. If there was another crisis that was taking place, we
would not have a brigade that we could send to deal with that crisis that
isn't already scheduled to be deployed in Iraq. That is not sustainable.
That's not smart national security policy, and it's going to change when I'm
president.


 Well, our first step should be to keep nuclear weapons out of the hands of the Iranians, and that has to be one of our top priorities. And I will make it one of our top priorities when I'm president of the United States. 

I have said I will do whatever is required to prevent the Iranians from
obtaining nuclear weapons. I believe that that includes direct talks with the
Iranians where we are laying out very clearly for them, here are the issues
that we find unacceptable, not only development of nuclear weapons but also
funding terrorist organizations like Hamas and Hezbollah, as well as their
anti-Israel rhetoric and threats towards Israel. I believe that we can offer
them carrots and sticks, but we've got to directly engage and make absolutely
clear to them what our posture is.

Now, my belief is that they should also know that I will take no options off
the table when it comes to preventing them from using nuclear weapons or
obtaining nuclear weapons, and that would include any threats directed at
Israel or any of our allies in the region.


 As I've said before, I think it is very important that Iran understands that an attack on Israel is an attack on our strongest ally in the region, one that we -- one whose security we consider paramount, and that -- that would be an act of aggression that we -- that I would -- that I would consider an attack that is unacceptable, and the United States would take appropriate action. 


 Well, I not only have pledged not to raise their taxes, I've been the first candidate in this race to specifically say I would cut their taxes. 

And one of the centerpieces of my economic plan would be to say that we are
going to offset the payroll tax, the most regressive of our taxes, so that
families who are earning -- who are middle-income individuals making $75,000 a
year or less, that they would get a tax break so that families would see up to
a thousand dollars worth of relief.

Senior citizens who have earnings of less than $50,000 wouldn't have to pay
income tax on their Social Security. And middle-class homeowners who currently
don't itemize on their tax filings, they would be able to get a deduction the
same way that wealthy individuals do.

Now, here's the reason why that's important. We have seen wages and incomes
flat or declining at a time when costs have gone up. And one of the things
that we've learned from George Bush's economic policies, which John McCain now
wants to follow, is that pain trickles up. And so, partly because people have
been strapped and have had a tough time making ends meet, we're now seeing a
deteriorating housing market.

That's also as a consequence of the lack of oversight and regulation of these
banks and financial institutions that gave loans that they shouldn't have. And
part of it has to do with the fact that you had $185 million by mortgage
lenders spent on lobbyists and special interests who were writing these laws.

So the rules in Washington -- the tax code has been written on behalf of the
well connected. Our trade laws have -- same thing has happened. And part of
how we're going to be able to deliver on middle-class tax relief is to change
how business is done in Washington. And that's been a central focus of our
campaign.


 Well, it depends on how you calculate it. But it would be between 200 and 250,000. 


 Right. 


 Right. 


 Well, Charlie, what I've said is that I would look at raising the capital gains tax for purposes of fairness. We saw an article today which showed that the top 50 hedge fund managers made $29 billion last year -- $29 billion for 50 individuals. And part of what has happened is that those who are able to work the stock market and amass huge fortunes on capital gains are paying a lower tax rate than their secretaries. That's not fair. 

And what I want is not oppressive taxation. I want businesses to thrive and I
want people to be rewarded for their success. But what I also want to make
sure is that our tax system is fair and that we are able to finance health
care for Americans who currently don't have it and that we're able to invest
in our infrastructure and invest in our schools.

And you can't do that for free, and you can't take out a credit card from the
Bank of China in the name of our children and our grandchildren and then say
that you're cutting taxes, which is essentially what John McCain has been
talking about. And that is irresponsible.

You know, I believe in the principle that you pay as you go, and you don't
propose tax cuts unless you are closing other tax breaks for individuals. And
you don't increase spending unless you're eliminating some spending or you're
finding some new revenue. That's how we got an additional $4 trillion worth of
debt under George Bush. That is helping to undermine our economy, and it's
going to change when I'm president of the United States.


 Well, that might happen or it might not. It depends on what's happening on Wall Street and how business is going. I think the biggest problem that we've got on Wall Street right now is the fact that we've got a housing crisis that this president has not been attentive to and that it took John McCain three tries before he got it right. 

And if we can stabilize that market and we can get credit flowing again, then
I think we'll see stocks do well, and once again I think we can generate the
revenue that we need to run this government and hopefully to pay down some of
this debt.


 Well, Charlie, I just have to respond real quickly to Senator Clinton's last comment. What I have proposed is that we raise the cap on the payroll tax, because right now millionaires and billionaires don't have to pay beyond $97,000 a year. 

That's where it's kept. Now most firefighters, most teachers, you know,
they're not making over $100,000 a year. In fact, only 6 percent of the
population does. And I've also said that I'd be willing to look at exempting
people who are making slightly above that.

But understand the alternative is that because we're going to have fewer
workers to more retirees, if we don't do anything on Social Security, then
those benefits will effectively be cut, because we'll be running out of money.


 Well, no, look, let me -- let me finish my point here, Charlie. Senator Clinton just said she certainly wouldn't do this; this was a bad idea. In Iowa she, when she was outside of camera range, said to an individual there she'd certainly consider the idea. And then that was recorded, and she apparently wasn't aware that it was being recorded. 

So this is an option that I would strongly consider, because the alternatives,
like raising the retirement age, or cutting benefits, or raising the payroll
tax on everybody, including people who make less than $97,000 a year --


 \-- those are not good policy options. 


 And that's -- and that's -- and that's why I've said, Charlie, that I would look at potentially exempting those who are in between. 

But the point is, we're going to have to capture some revenue in order to
stabilize the Social Security system. You can't -- you can't get something for
nothing. And if we care about Social Security, which I do, and if we are firm
in our commitment to make sure that it's going to be there for the next
generation, and not just for our generation, then we have an obligation to
figure out how to stabilize the system.

And I think we should be honest in presenting our ideas in terms of how we're
going to do that and not just say that we're going to form a commission and
try to solve the problem some other way.


 That commission raised the retirement age, Charlie, and also raised the payroll tax. And so Senator Clinton, if she -- she can't have it both ways. You can't come at me for proposing a solution that will save Social Security without burdening middle- income Americans, and then suggest that somehow she's got a magic solution. 


 Well, Charlie, I confess I obviously haven't listened to the briefs and looked at all the evidence. 

As a general principle, I believe that the Constitution confers an individual
right to bear arms. But just because you have an individual right does not
mean that the state or local government can't constrain the exercise of that
right, and, you know, in the same way that we have a right to private property
but local governments can establish zoning ordinances that determine how you
can use it.

And I think that it is going to be important for us to reconcile what are two
realities in this country.

There's the reality of gun ownership and the tradition of gun ownership that's
passed on from generation to generation. You know, when you listen to people
who have hunted, and they talk about the fact that they went hunting with
their fathers or their mothers, then that is something that is deeply
important to them and, culturally, they care about deeply.

But you also have the reality of what's happening here in Philadelphia and
what's happening in Chicago.

And...


 No, my writing wasn't on that particular questionnaire, Charlie. As I said, I have never favored an all-out ban on handguns. 

What I think we can provide is common-sense approaches to the issue of illegal
guns that are ending up on the streets. We can make sure that criminals don't
have guns in their hands. We can make certain that those who are mentally
deranged are not getting a hold of handguns. We can trace guns that have been
used in crimes to unscrupulous gun dealers that may be selling to straw
purchasers and dumping them on the streets.

The point is, is that what we have to do is get beyond the politics of this
issue and figure out what, in fact, is working.

Look, in my hometown of Chicago, on the south side of Chicago, we've had 34
gun deaths last year of Chicago public school children.

And I think that most law-abiding gun owners all across America would
recognize that it is perfectly appropriate for local communities and states
and the federal government to try to figure out, how do we stop that kind of
killing?


 Well, I think that the basic principle that should guide discussions not just on affirmative action but how we are admitting young people to college generally is, how do we make sure that we're providing ladders of opportunity for people? How do we make sure that every child in America has a decent shot in pursuing their dreams? 

And race is still a factor in our society. And I think that for universities
and other institutions to say, you know, we're going to take into account the
hardships that somebody has experienced because they're black or Latino or
because they're women --


 I think that's something that they can take into account, but it can only be in the context of looking at the whole situation of the young person. So if they look at my child and they say, you know, Malia and Sasha, they've had a pretty good deal, then that shouldn't be factored in. On the other hand, if there's a young white person who has been working hard, struggling, and has overcome great odds, that's something that should be taken into account. 

So I still believe in affirmative action as a means of overcoming both
historic and potentially current discrimination, but I think that it can't be
a quota system and it can't be something that is simply applied without
looking at the whole person, whether that person is black or white or
Hispanic, male or female.

What we want to do is make sure that people who have been locked out of
opportunity are going to be able to walk through those doors of opportunity in
the future.


 Well, you're right. And that's why people are cynical, because decade after decade, we talk about energy policy or we talk about health care policy, and through Democratic and Republican administrations, nothing gets done. 

Now, I think many of the steps that Senator Clinton outlined are similar to
the plans that we talked about. It is absolutely true that we've got to
investigate potential price gouging or market manipulation. I have strongly
called for a windfall profits tax that can provide both consumers relief and
also invest in renewable energies.

I think that long term, we're going to have to raise fuel efficiency standards
on cars, because the only way that we're going to be able to reduce gas prices
is if we reduce demand. You've still got a billion people in China, and maybe
700 million in India, who still want cars. And so the long-term trajectory is
that we're going to have to get serious about increasing our fuel efficiency
standards and investing in new technologies.

That's something I'm committed to doing. I've talked about spending $150
billion over 10 years in an Apollo Project, a Manhattan Project to create the
alternative energy strategies that will work not only for this generation but
for the next.


 Well, you know, I think that having the advice and counsel of all former presidents is important. I'm probably more likely to advice of the current president's father than president himself because I think that when you look back at George H.W. Bush's foreign policy, it was a wise foreign policy. 

And how we executed the Gulf War, how we managed the transition out of the
Cold War, I think, is an example of how we can get bipartisan agreement. I
don't think the Democrats have a monopoly on good ideas. I think that there
are a lot of thoughtful Republicans out there.

The problem is, we've been locked in a divided politics for so long that we've
stopped listening to each other. And I think that this president in particular
has fed those divisions. That's something that we've tried to end in this
campaign, and I think we're being successful.


 Well, when we started this campaign 15 months ago, it was based on a couple of simple principles: number one, that we were in a defining moment in our history. Our nation's at war. Our planet's in peril. Our economy is in a shambles. And most importantly, the American people have lost trust in their government, not just Democrats but independents and Republicans who've been disillusioned about promises that have been made election after election, decade after decade. 

And the bet I was making was a bet on the American people; that they were
tired of a politics that was about tearing about each other down, but wanted a
politics that was about lifting the country up; that they didn't want spin and
PR out of their elected officials, they wanted an honest conversation.

And most importantly, I believe that change does not happen from the top down,
it happens from the bottom up. And that's why we decided we weren't going to
take PAC money or money from federal registered lobbyists, that we were not
going to be subject to special- interest influence, but instead were going to
enlist the American people in a project of changing this country.

And during the course of these last 15 months, my bet's paid off because the
American people have responded in record numbers, and not just people who are
accustomed to participating, but people who haven't participated in years. I
talked to a woman here in Pennsylvania, 70 years old, she whispered to me,
"I've never voted before, but I'm going to vote in this election."

And so my point to the super delegates would be that if we're going to deliver
on health care for every American, improve our schools, deliver on jobs, then
it's going to be absolutely vital we form a new political coalition in this
country. That's what we've been doing in this campaign, and that's what I'm
going to do when I'm president of the United States of America.




 Absolutely. Well, the fact is I don't take PAC money and I don't take lobbyists' money. And the bundlers -- the reason you know who is raising money for me, Mike, is because I have pushed through a law this past session to disclose that. And that's the kind of leadership that I've shown in the Senate. That's the kind of leadership that I showed when I was a state legislator. And that's the kind of leadership that I'll show as president of the United States. 


 I think the reparations we need right here in South Carolina is investment, for example, in our schools. I did a... (APPLAUSE) I did a town hall meeting in Florence, South Carolina, in an area called the corridor of shame. They've got buildings that students are trying to learn in that were built right after the Civil War. And we've got teachers who are not trained to teach the subjects they're teaching and high dropout rates. We've got to understand that there are corridors of shame all across the country. And if we make the investments and understand that those are our children, that's the kind of reparations that are really going to make a difference in America right now. 


 Well... 


 You know, when I'm catching a cab in Manhattan -- in the past, I think I've given my credentials. 

(LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE)

But let me go to the broader issue here. And that is that race permeates our
society. It is still a critical problem. But I do believe in the core decency
of the American people, and I think they want to get beyond some of our racial
divisions. Unfortunately, we've had a White House that hasn't invested in the
kinds of steps that have to be done to overcome the legacy of slavery and Jim
Crow in this country. And as president of the United States, my commitment on
issues like education, my commitment on issues like health care is to close
the disparities and the gaps, because that's what's really going to solve the
race problem in this country. If people feel like they've got a fair shake, if
children feel as if the fact that they have a different surname or they've got
a different skin color is not going to impede their dreams, then I am
absolutely confident that we're going to be able to move forward on the
challenges that we face as a country.

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, I think that it is important to pick up on something that was said earlier by both Dennis and by Bill, and that is that we've got to make sure that everybody is equal under the law. And the civil unions that I proposed would be equivalent in terms of making sure that all the rights that are conferred by the state are equal for same-sex couples as well as for heterosexual couples. Now, with respect to marriage, it's my belief that it's up to the individual denominations to make a decision as to whether they want to recognize marriage or not. But in terms of, you know, the rights of people to transfer property, to have hospital visitation, all those critical civil rights that are conferred by our government, those should be equal. 


 Well, I think that it is important to pick up on something that was said earlier by both Dennis and by Bill, and that is that we've got to make sure that everybody is equal under the law. And the civil unions that I proposed would be equivalent in terms of making sure that all the rights that are conferred by the state are equal for same-sex couples as well as for heterosexual couples. 

Now, with respect to marriage, it's my belief that it's up to the individual
denominations to make a decision as to whether they want to recognize marriage
or not. But in terms of, you know, the rights of people to transfer property,
to have hospital visitation, all those critical civil rights that are
conferred by our government, those should be equal.


 Look, I opposed this war from the start. Because I anticipated that we would be creating the kind of sectarian violence that we've seen and that it would distract us from the war on terror. 


 I'm going to get to the question, Anderson. 

At this point, I think we can be as careful getting out as we were careless
getting in. But we have to send a clear message to the Iraqi government as
well as to the surrounding neighbors that there is no military solution to the
problems that we face in Iraq.

We just heard a White House spokesman, Tony Snow, excuse the fact that the
Iraqi legislature went on vacation for three weeks because it's hot in
Baghdad. Well, let me tell you: It is hot for American troops who are over
there with 100 pounds worth of gear.

(APPLAUSE)

And that kind of irresponsibility is not helpful.

So we have to begin a phased withdrawal; have our combat troops out by March
31st of next year; and initiate the kind of diplomatic surge that is necessary
in these surrounding regions to make sure that everybody is carrying their
weight.

And that is what I will do on day one, as president of the United States, if
we have not done it in the intervening months.

(APPLAUSE)


 Our soldiers have done everything that's been asked of them. They deposed Saddam Hussein. 

They have carried out extraordinarily difficult missions with great courage
and great bravery.

But, you know, one thing I have to say about Senator Clinton's comments a
couple of moments ago. I think it's terrific that she's asking for plans from
the Pentagon, and I think the Pentagon response was ridiculous. But what I
also know is that the time for us to ask how we were going to get out of Iraq
was before we went in.

(APPLAUSE)

And that is something that too many of us failed to do. We failed to do it.
And I do think that that is something that both Republicans and Democrats have
to take responsibility for.

When I am president of the United States, when I send our troops into battle,
I am going to be absolutely sure that it is based on sound intelligence, and
I'm going to tell the truth to the American people, as well as the families
who are being asked to sacrifice.


 I never think that troops, like those who are coming out of The Citadel, who do their mission for their country, are dying in vain. But what I do think is that the civilian leadership and the commander in chief has a responsibility to make sure that they have the plans that are going to allow our troops to succeed in their mission. 


 You know, a while back we had a celebration in the Capitol for the Tuskegee Airmen, and it was extraordinarily powerful because it reminded us, there was a time when African-Americans weren't allowed to serve in combat. 

And yet, when they did, not only did they perform brilliantly, but what also
happened is they helped to change America, and they helped to underscore that
we're equal.

And I think that if women are registered for service -- not necessarily in
combat roles, and I don't agree with the draft -- I think it will help to send
a message to my two daughters that they've got obligations to this great
country as well as boys do.

(APPLAUSE)


 I would. And the reason is this, that the notion that somehow not talking to countries is punishment to them -- which has been the guiding diplomatic principle of this administration -- is ridiculous. 

(APPLAUSE)

Now, Ronald Reagan and Democratic presidents like JFK constantly spoke to
Soviet Union at a time when Ronald Reagan called them an evil empire. And the
reason is because they understood that we may not trust them and they may pose
an extraordinary danger to this country, but we had the obligation to find
areas where we can potentially move forward.

And I think that it is a disgrace that we have not spoken to them. We've been
talking about Iraq -- one of the first things that I would do in terms of
moving a diplomatic effort in the region forward is to send a signal that we
need to talk to Iran and Syria because they're going to have responsibilities
if Iraq collapses.

They have been acting irresponsibly up until this point. But if we tell them
that we are not going to be a permanent occupying force, we are in a position
to say that they are going to have to carry some weight, in terms of
stabilizing the region.


 I had a teacher in fifth grade named Mrs. Hefty (ph). And I was just coming from overseas, coming back to the United States, felt a little bit out of place. And she had actually lived in Kenya and worked there and taught there and was able to give me some sense that even though I had experiences outside this country, those were actually valuable and important. 

And that's the power of a good teacher, is making every single child feel
special.

And we need more teachers like that in front of every single classroom.


 My kids have gone to the University of Chicago Lab School, a private school, because I taught there, and it was five minutes from our house. So it was the best option for our kids. 

But the fact is that there are some terrific public schools in Chicago that
they could be going to. The problem is, is that we don't have good schools,
public schools, for all kids.

A U.S. senator can get his kid into a terrific public school. That's not the
question. The question is whether or not ordinary parents, who can't work the
system, are able to get their kids into a decent school, and that's what I
need to fight for and will fight for as president of the United States.

(APPLAUSE)


 Ironically, this was actually a proposal that he himself said he supported when he was running for governor of Massachusetts. 


 Apparently, he forgot. 

(LAUGHTER)

And it makes the exact point that John made.

I've got a 9-year-old daughter and a 6-year-old daughter. And I want them to
know if somebody is doing something wrong to them, encroaching on their
privacy, that they should come talk to me or my wife.

And we've had that conversation, but not every parent is going to have that
conversation with their child, and I think it's important that every child
does, to make sure that they're not subject to the sexual predators.


 I actually think that we should explore nuclear power as part of the energy mix. There are no silver bullets to this issue. We have to develop solar. I have proposed drastically increasing fuel efficiency standards on cars, an aggressive cap on the amount of greenhouse gases that can be emitted. 


 But we're going to have to try a series of different approaches. 

The one thing I have to remind folks, though, of -- we've been talking about
this through Republican administrations and Democratic administrations for
decades.

And the reason it doesn't change -- you can take a look at how Dick Cheney did
his energy policy. He met with environmental groups once. He met with
renewable energy folks once. And then he met with oil and gas companies 40
times. And that's how they put together our energy policy. We've got to put
the national interests ahead of special interests, and that's what I'll do as
president of the United States.

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, we can afford to work for the minimum wage because most folks on this stage have a lot of money. It's the folks... 

(APPLAUSE)

.... on that screen who deserve -- you're doing all right, Chris, compared to,
I promise you, the folks who are on that screen.

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)


 I mean, we don't have -- we don't have Mitt Romney money, but... 

(LAUGHTER)

But we could afford to do it for a few years. Most folks can't.

And that's why we've got to fight and advocate for...


 I think that it is an important option on the table, but the key, in addition to making sure that we don't privatize, because Social Security is that floor beneath none of us can sink. 


 And we've got to make sure that we preserve Social Security is to do the same thing that Ronald Reagan and Tip O'Neill were able to do back in 1983, which is come up with a bipartisan solution that puts Social Security on a firm footing for a long time. 


 Absolutely it does. John and I have a disagreement. 

John thinks that the only way we get universal coverage is to mandate
coverage. I think that the problem is not that people are trying to avoid
getting health care coverage.

It is folks like that who are desperately in desire of it, but they can can't
afford it.


 And I know from personal experience. My mother, when she was between jobs, contracted cancer, and she spent the last few months of her life trying to figure out whether or not she was going to be able to pay for the treatments. 

It is an outrage. How is that the wealthiest nation on Earth cannot afford to
provide coverage to all people? And that's why I put forward a plan.

(APPLAUSE)

But let's understand this. Everybody here is going to have a plan. John's got
a plan. I've got a plan. Hopefully, everybody here will provide a plan for
universal coverage.

But we've had plan before, under a Democratic president in the '90s and a
Democratic Congress. We couldn't get it done because the drug insurance --
drug and insurance companies are spending $1 billion over the last decade on
lobbying.

(APPLAUSE)

And that's why we've got to have a president who is willing to fight to make
sure that they don't have veto power. They can have a seat at the table, but
they can't buy every single chair when it comes to crafting the sort of
universal health care that's going to help the folks that you saw in that
video.


 Look, I think every single question we've heard you see cynicism about the capacity to change this country. And the question for the American people, who desperately want change, is: Who's got a track record of bringing about change? 

Who can unify the country, so that we're not just talking about Democrats and
Republicans, but we're talking about Americans? And who can overcome the
special interests in Washington so that we have a president of the United
States who is fighting on behalf of ordinary people?


 And that, I think, is going to be the kind of president that is going to be elected -- is going to be nominated by the Democrats, and I believe that I'm best qualified to fill that role. 


 I am proud of my Christian faith. And it informs what I do. And I don't think that people of any faith background should be prohibited from debating in the public square. 


 But I am a strong believer in the separation of church and state, and I think that we've got to translate... 

(APPLAUSE)

By the way, I support it not just for the state but also for the church,
because that maintains our religious independence and that's why we have such
a thriving religious life.

But what I also think is that we are under obligation in public life to
translate our religious values into moral terms that all people can share,
including those who are not believers. And that is how our democracy's
functioning, will continue to function. That's what the founding fathers
intended.


 We want an end to this war. And we want diplomacy and peace. Not only can we save the environment; we can create jobs and opportunity. We're tired of fear. We're tired of division. We want something new. We want to turn the page. 

(APPLAUSE)

The world as it is is not the world as it has to be.

(END VIDEO CLIP)


 I actually like Hillary's jacket. I don't know what's wrong with it. And I like the fact that Bill Richardson has devoted his life to public service, because that, I think, is the highest of callings. 

(APPLAUSE)

I don't like the fact that he either likes the Yankees or the Red Sox, but
doesn't apparently like the White Sox. And we're having a tough time this
year.


 Well, you know, to prepare for this debate, I rode in the bumper cars at the state fair, and... 

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)

But, George, I don't actually see that much difference or people criticizing
me on the substance of my positions. I think that there's been some political
maneuvering taking place over the last couple of weeks.

I do think that there's a substantive difference between myself and Senator
Clinton when it comes to meeting with our adversaries. I think that strong
countries and strong presidents meet and talk with our adversaries. We
shouldn't be afraid to do so.

We've tried the other way. It didn't work.

I think that, if we have Osama bin Laden in our sights and we've exhausted all
other options, we should take him out before he plans to kill another 3,000
Americans. I think that's common sense.

So there's one other thing that I believe.


 And that is that we should describe for the American people both in presidential debates, as well as president, what our foreign policy is and what we're going to do. We shouldn't have strategic ambiguity with the American people when it comes to describing how we're going to deal with the most serious national security issues that we face. 

And it is my belief that we need a fundamental change if we're going to dig
ourselves out of the hole that George Bush has placed us in. And that's going
to require the kind of aggressive diplomacy -- preparation, yes, but
aggressive diplomacy, the personal diplomacy of the next president -- to
transform how the world sees us. That us ultimately going to make us safer.


 There was no difference. It is not hypothetical that Al Qaida has established base camps in the hills between Afghanistan and Pakistan. That was acknowledged in the national intelligence estimates. And every foreign policy understands that. 

No military expert would advise that we use nuclear weapons to deal with them,
but we do have to deal with that problem.

And so, this is part of what I think Americans get frustrated about in
politics, where we have gamesmanship and we manufacture issues and
controversies instead of talking about the serious problem that we have, a
problem that this administration has made worse and that our invasion of Iraq
has made worse, but a problem that the next president is going to have to deal
with. And the American people deserve to hear what we're going to do.


 I am. 


 You know, I think Senator Clinton and all the candidates up here are capable. And whoever wins the general election I believe -- whoever wins the primary I believe is going to win the general election. 

But I think there's something bigger at stake here. We all agree that the last
six years have been disastrous for America, both at home and abroad. But the
fact is that the big challenges we face, whether it's health care or a bold
energy strategy or schools that aren't producing young people that can compete
on the global stage, those are problems that pre-date the Bush administration.


 They're not just Republican problems. They're Democratic problems and American problems. And, you know, I think a winning strategy is not crafted by a political calculus that divides the country into red states and blue states. 

So what I've been trying to express in my campaign is that if you believe that
part of the problem is the failed politics of Washington and the conventional
thinking in Washington, if you're tired of the backbiting and the score
keeping and the special-interest-driven politics of Washington, if you want
somebody who can bring the country together around a common purpose and rally
us around a common destiny, then I'm your guy.


 What I'm suggesting is that we're going to need somebody who can break out of the political patterns that we've been in over the last 20 years. And part of that is the notion that half the country's on one side; the other half's on the other. 


 You maybe have a few people in Iowa or a few people in Ohio and Florida who we're all battling over, and afterwards, we can't govern. 

And what I'm interested in is not only winning the election, but also
providing relief to people who don't have health care, making sure that we're
tackling climate change in a serious way. And I think that's going to require
building a new majority, getting new people involved in the process, and I
wouldn't be running if I didn't believe that I was the person best equipped to
do that.

(APPLAUSE)


 The answer is: I would not be running if I did not believe that I was the best person to do this. 


 I think Joe is right on the issue of how long this is going to take. This is not going to be a simple operation. I think Senator Clinton laid out some of the challenges that were out there. I agree with John Edwards that all of us on this stage I think would begin to bring this war to an end. 

I think we also can all agree that it's going to be messy, that there are no
good options.


 There are only bad options and worse options, and we're going to have to exercise judgment in terms of how we execute this. But the thing I wish had happened was that all the people on this stage had asked these questions before they authorized us getting in. 

And I make that point...

(APPLAUSE)

... because earlier on we were talking about the issue of experience. Nobody
had more experience than Donald Rumsfeld and Dick Cheney and many of the
people on this stage that authorized this war.

(APPLAUSE)

And it indicates how we get into trouble when we engage in the sort of
conventional thinking that has become the habit in Washington. Now, that
judgment is going to have to be exercised moving forward, and I actually think
that Joe's point about partition might be the right one.

The only area I disagree with -- with Joe on that -- is that it is important
for the Iraqis to arrive at the conclusion that partition makes sense, as
opposed to it being imposed by the United States government.


 Because I think if that happens, if the perception is that we are carving up the country as opposed to the parties arriving at a decision, then that could antagonize some of the factions and actually make the problem worse. 


 My sense is that what all of us need to do over the next 16, 18 months is focus on putting pressure on Republicans to stop giving George Bush a blank check, because if we have to wait for 16, 18 months, that's going to make the situation that much worse. 

If we have not began a withdrawal by the time I'm sworn into office, then the
next task is to call together the Joint Chief of Staff and to give them the
mission, which is to begin an orderly, phased withdrawal, so that we can begin
the diplomacy that Joe and Bill and others are talking about.

But look, as I said, there are no good options at this point.


 This is the equivalent of George Bush drove the bus into the ditch, and there are only so many ways you can pull that bus out of the ditch. That doesn't mean you don't fire the driver, and it doesn't mean that you don't evaluate how we avoid getting in these same problems in the future. 

(APPLAUSE)


 I believe in the power of prayer. And part of what I believe in is that, through prayer, not only can we strengthen ourselves in adversity, but that we can also find the empathy and the compassion and the will to deal with the problems that we do control. 


 Most of the issues that we're debating here today are ones that we have the power to change. 

We don't have the power to prevent illness in all cases, but we do have the
power to make sure that every child gets a regular checkup and isn't going to
the emergency room for treatable illnesses like asthma.

We may not have the power to prevent a hurricane, but we do have the power to
make sure that the levees are properly reinforced and we've got a sound
emergency plan.

And so, part of what I pray for is the strength and the wisdom to be able to
act on those things that I can control. And that's what I think has been
lacking sometimes in our government.


 We've got to express those values through our government, not just through our religious institutions. 

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, I think that many of the recommendations that have been made are the right ones. There's one other thing, though, that we've got to talk about. And that is that our Congress subsidizes these big megafarms and hurts family farmers oftentimes in the process. 

And we've got to, I think, cap those subsidies so that we don't have continued
concentration of agriculture in the hands of a few large agribusiness
interests. But, on the trade issue generally, we're not going to suddenly
cordon off America from the world.


 Globalization is here, and I don't think Americans are afraid to compete. And we have the goods and the services and the skills and the innovation to compete anywhere in the world. 

But what we've got to make absolutely certain of is that, in that competition,
we are hard bargainers.

You know, I'm always struck by the Bush administration touting that this is
the MBA president and they're such great businessmen, and they get taken to
the cleaners in a lot of these trade agreements.

And we've got to have somebody who's negotiating on behalf of workers and
family farmers right here in Iowa, as opposed to someplace else.


 I think there are a number of issues where there are going to be some choices we've got to make and some sacrifices involved. I'll give you one specific example, and that's on energy. All of us on this stage have talked about global warming and how it is a moral imperative for us to do something about this, to ensure that we're passing on a livable planet to our children and our grandchildren. 

There will be some costs involved. It's not -- we can't do it on the cheap.
There are some things that we can do to conserve energy, but all of those
steps are going to require a little bit of hardship and a little bit of
pinching, and that's something that we don't have enough of a discussion
about.

I've tried to. I went to Detroit, and in front of a bunch of auto makers, I
said we've got to raise fuel efficiency standards on cars. And the silence was
deafening in the room.

But those are the kinds of choices, I think, that the next president is going
to have to advance and have an honest conversation with the American people
about.


 Well, I've had a lot of discussions with teachers all throughout Iowa. And they feel betrayed and frustrated by No Child Left Behind. And Chris is right: We shouldn't reauthorize it without changing it fundamentally. 

We left the money behind for No Child Left Behind, and so there are school
districts all across the state and all across the country that are having a
difficult time implementing No Child Left Behind. And teachers are
extraordinarily frustrated about how their performance is assessed.

And not just their own performance, but the school's performance generally. So
they're teaching to the tests all the time. What I have said is that we should
be able to get buy-in from teachers in terms of how to measure progress.


 Every teacher I think wants to succeed. And if we give them a pathway to professional development, where we're creating master teachers, they are helping with apprenticeships for young new teachers, they are doing more work, they are involved in a variety of other activities, that are really adding value to the schools, then we should be able to give them more money for it. 

But we should only do it if the teachers themselves have some buy-in in terms
of how they're measured. They can't be judged simply on standardized tests
that don't take into account whether children are prepared before they get to
school or not, which is also one of the reasons why we've got to put more
money into early childhood education.

(APPLAUSE)


 I want to be clear, George. I actually think that we can implement a performance-based system that teachers buy in to. But I don't think it can be imposed on teachers. I think it has to be one that is developed with teachers so that they have a sense -- Bill is exactly right. 

Teachers, across the board, have to be paid more. My sister's a teacher, and I
know how hard they work and what they go through.

But we've got to give them a pathway so that they can make more money, as they
are developing more experience, as they are putting more into the classroom.


 We do need more liquidity, but we're going to have to not only help home owners who are going to be losing their homes as a consequence of this; we're going to have to go forward and make sure that we've got the kinds of tough regulation when it comes to financial instruments to make sure that people who have saved and are trying to get their own home for the first time are not hoodwinked out of it. 


 And, unfortunately, the reason that we haven't had tougher regulation in part goes back to the issue of lobbying. This is where special interests have been driving the agenda. We have not had the kinds of consumer protections that are in place. 

And that's why, when we have this debate about lobbying, we have to remind
ourselves it has very real consequences for the people of Iowa and the people
around the country.

(APPLAUSE)


 A decisive moment in my life was the transition from high school to college, because I had gone through a difficult time, not knowing my father, and was, at times, an angry young man. 


 And partly because of the values my mother had instilled in me, those were reawakened in college. 

And it made me serious about, not just what I could do for myself, but what I
could do for other people. It's what led me to become a community organizer.
It's what led me to go into public service. And ultimately, it's what led me
to this stage.

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, first of all, Tim, let me say thank you to Dartmouth for hosting this event. 

And let me also say that had my judgment prevailed back in 2002, we wouldn't
be in this predicament. I was opposed to this war from the start, have been
opposed to this war consistently. But I have also said that there are no good
options now; there are bad options and worse options.

I hope and will work diligently in the Senate to bring an end to this war
before I take office. And I think that it is very important at this stage,
understanding how badly the president's strategy has failed, that we not vote
for funding without some timetable for this war.

If there are still large troop presences in when I take office, then the first
thing I will do is call together the Joint Chiefs of Staff and initiate a
phased redeployment. We've got to be as careful getting out as we were
careless getting in. But military personnel indicate we can get one brigade to
two brigades out per month. I would immediately begin that process. We would
get combat troops out of Iraq. The only troops that would remain would be
those that have to protect U.S. bases and U.S. civilians, as well as to engage
in counterterrorism activities in Iraq.

The important principle, though, is there are not going to be any military
solutions to the problem in Iraq. There has to be a political accommodation,
and the best way for us to support the troops and to stabilize the situation
in Iraq is to begin that phased redeployment.


 I think it's hard to project four years from now, and I think it would be irresponsible. We don't know what contingency will be out there. 

What I can promise is that if there are still troops in Iraq when I take
office, which it appears there may be unless we can get some of our Republican
colleagues to change their mind and cut off funding without a timetable, if
there's no timetable, then I will drastically reduce our presence there to the
mission of protecting our embassy, protecting our civilians and making sure
that we're carrying out counterterrorism activities there.

I believe that we should have all our troops out by 2013, but I don't want to
make promises not knowing what the situation's going to be three or four years
out.


 I think it's important to back up for a second, Tim, and just understand, number one, Iran is in a stronger position now than it was before the Iraq war because the Congress authorized the president to go in. And so it indicates the degree to which we've got to make sure, before we launch attacks or make judgments of the sort, that we actually understand the intelligence and we have done a good job in sorting it through. 

Now, we don't know exactly what happened with respect to Syria . We've gotten
general reports, but we don't know all the specifics. We got general reports
in the run-up to the Iraq war that proved erroneous, and a lot of people voted
for that war as a consequence.

Now, we are a stalwart ally of Israel , and I think it is important to
understand that we will back them up in terms of their security. But it is
critical to understand that until we have taken the diplomatic routes that are
required to tighten economic sanctions

\-- I have a plan right now to make sure that private pension funds in this
country can divest from their holdings in Iran . Until we have gathered the
international community to put the squeeze on Iran economically, then we
shouldn't be having conversations about attacks in Iran . And I think what
Mayor Giuliani said was irresponsible, because we have not yet come to that
point. We have not tried the other approach.


 I make an absolute commitment that we will do everything we need to do to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons. One of the things we have to try, though, is to talk directly to Iran , something that we have not been doing. And, you know, one of the disagreements that we have on this stage is the degree to which the next president is going to have to engage in the sort of personal diplomacy that can bring about a new era in the region. And, you know, that means talking to everybody. We've got to talk to our enemies and not just our friends. 


 The federal law is not being enforced not because of failures of local communities, because the federal government has not done the job that it needs to do. And -- 


 What I would do as president is pass comprehensive immigration reform. And the federal government should be doing, which is controlling our borders but also providing a rational immigration system, which we currently don't have. 


 Because I think that the country is at a crossroads right now and it needs three things. Number one, it needs somebody who can bring the country together, and that's the kind of experience that I bring to this office. When I was in the state legislature, I was able to get people who were polar opposites -- police officers and law enforcement working with civil rights advocates to reform a death penalty system that was broken; bringing people together, Republicans and Democrats, to provide health insurance to people who didn't have it. That's number one. 

Number two, we need somebody who can take on the special interests and win.
And I have consistently done that. On money in politics, in the state
legislature I passed landmark ethics legislation against not just Republicans
but also some of the leaders in my own party. I did the same thing working
with Russ Feingold with the ethics reform package that we passed last year.

And the third thing is telling the truth to the American people even when it's
tough, which I did in 2002, standing up against this war at a time where it
was very unpopular. And I was risking my political career, because I was in
the middle of a U.S. Senate race.

Now, those are, I think, the kinds of experiences that people are looking for
right now in this country, and that's the kind of experience I bring to bear
to this race. I just want to make one last comment. I think Hillary Clinton
deserves credit for having worked on health care. I think John deserves credit
for his proposal. I know that, you know, he feels that he put out his plan
first. You know, Harry Truman put something out 60 years ago for universal
health care. I wrote about it in a book that I wrote last year -- a plan very
similar to John's.

The issue is not going to be who has these particular plans. It has to do with
who can inspire and mobilize the American people to get it done and open up
the process. If it was lonely for Hillary, part of the reason it was lonely,
Hillary, was because you closed the door to a lot of potential allies in that
process. At that time, 80 percent of Americans already wanted universal health
care, but they didn't feel like they were let into the process.


 You know, I feel very similar to John: that -- you know, the fact is, my 9-year-old and my 6-year-old's -- I think, are already aware that there are same-sex couples. And my wife and I have talked about it. 

And one of the things I want to communicate to my children is not to be afraid
of people who are different, and because there have been times in our history
where I was considered different, or Bill Richardson was considered different.

And one of the things I think the next president has to do is to stop fanning
people's fears. You know, if we spend all our time feeding the American people
fear and conflict and division, then they become fearful and conflicted and
divided. And if we feed them hope, and we feed them reason and tolerance, then
they will become tolerant and reasonable and hopeful. And that, I think, is
one of the most important things that the next president can do, is try to
bring us together and stop trying to fan the flames of division that have
become so -- so standard in our politics in Washington. That's the kind of
experience, by the way, that we need to put an end to.


 My wife has. MS. KING: Okay. 

I'd like to ask Senator Clinton the same question.


 I think that lifting the cap is probably going to be the best option. 

Now we've got to have a process that's already been talked about. Joe
participated back in 1983. We need another one. And I think I've said before
everything should be on the table.

My personal view is that lifting the cap is much preferable to the other
options that are available.

But what's critical is to recognize that there is a potential problem. As I
travel around Iowa and New Hampshire, I meet young people who don't think
Social Security is going to be there for them. They don't believe it's going
to be there for them. And I think it's important for us, in addition to
getting our fiscal house in order, to acknowledge, as Democrats, that there
may be a problem that we've got to take on. And we should be willing to do
anything that will strengthen the system, to make sure that that we are being
true to the sacred of those who are already retired, as well as young people
in the future. And we should reject things that will weaken the system,
including privatization, which essentially is going to put people's retirement
at the whim of the stock market.


 I think that local communities are making enormous strides, and I think they're doing the right thing on this. If it turns out that we're not seeing enough progress at the local level, then I would favor a national law. I don't think we've seen the local laws play themselves out entirely, because I think you're seeing an enormous amount of progress in Chicago, in New York, in other major cities around the country. And because I think we have been treating this as a public health problem and educating the public on the dangers of secondhand smoke, that that pressure will continue. As I said, if we can't provide these kinds of protections at the local level, which would be my preference, I would be supportive of a national law. 


 I have. The -- you know, the best cure is my wife. (Laughter.) 


 No. 


 What I'm talking about is ending the divisive politics that we have in this country. I think it is important for us as Democrats to be clear about what we stand for. But I think we also have to invite Republicans and independents to join us in a progressive agenda for universal health care, to make sure that they are included in conversations about improving our education system and properly funding our public schools. I think turning the page means that we've got to get over the special interest-driven politics that we've become accustomed to. And most importantly it's important for us to make sure that we're telling the truth to the American people about the choices we face. 


 No, because I was in Washington at that time trying to bring an end to the war in Iraq, and that was something that was critical. The fact is that I was -- before any of the other candidates on this stage, spoke out with respect to Jena. I put out several strong statements, including ones prepared with Jesse Jackson's son, Congressman Jesse Jackson Jr. And, subsequently, I think Reverend Jackson acknowledged that. This is an issue that's not black or white. It's an issue of American justice. We've got to make sure the justice system works for every single person. 


 You know, I'm happy to have this discussion again, Bill. I think it is important to tell the American people the truth. Now, military commanders indicate that they can safely get combat troops out at the pace of one to two brigades a month. That is the quickest pace that we can do it safely. I have said I will begin immediately and we will do it as rapidly as we can. 

It is the same issue with Social Security, where the pretense is that somehow
we can do this magically. We can't. I think it's important for the next
president to tell the American people not just what they want to hear, or to
tell our own base what they want to hear, but what they need to hear. They
need to hear...


 I don't think that we can take nuclear power off the table. What we have to make sure of is that we have the capacity to store it properly and safely, and that we reduce whatever threats might come from terrorism. And if we can do that in a technologically sound way, then we should pursue it. If we can't, we should not. 

But there is no magic bullet on energy. We're going to have to look at all the
various options to reduce greenhouse gases and to put us on a path to energy
independence.


 America cannot sanction torture. It's a very straightforward principle, and one that we should abide by. Now, I will do whatever it takes to keep America safe. And there are going to be all sorts of hypotheticals and emergency situations and I will make that judgment at that time. But what we cannot do is have the president of the United States state, as a matter of policy, that there is a loophole or an exception where we would sanction torture. I think that diminishes us and it sends the wrong message to the world. 


 I just want to amplify on this issue. Because I think it's important not only that all this information is disclosed, but I also think that we need to have a situation in which we are disclosing the funneling of large donors. 

And that is something that we were able to successfully do. I pushed it with
Russ Feingold to make sure that large funnelers who were lobbyists were
disclosed.

We are now in the process of presenting a bill where any large bundler has to
disclose who they're bundling money from and who are they funneling it to. And
I think that should be passed right away.


 Well, I think it would have to be the Sermon on the Mount, because it expresses a basic principle that I think we've lost over the last six years. 

John talked about what we've lost. Part of what we've lost is a sense of
empathy towards each other. We have been governed in fear and division, and
you know, we talk about the federal deficit, but we don't talk enough about
the empathy deficit, a sense that I stand in somebody else's shoes, I see
through their eyes. People who are struggling trying to figure out how to pay
the gas bill, or try to send their kids to college. We are not thinking about
them at the federal level.

That's the reason I'm running for president, because I want to restore that.


 Sox, but the wrong color. I'm a White Sox fan all the way. 

(LAUGHTER)


 Well, I think Iran continues to be a threat to some of its neighbors in the region. So they're still funding Hamas, they're still funding Hezbollah, and those are things we have to be concerned about. 

But it is absolutely clear that this administration and President Bush
continues to not let facts get in the way of his ideology. And that's been the
problem with their foreign policy generally.

They should have stopped the saber rattling; should have never started it. And
they need, now, to aggressively move on the diplomatic front.

I have said consistently, since the beginning of this campaign, that it is
important for the president to lead diplomatic efforts, to try to offer to
Iran the prospect of joining the World Trade Organization, potential
normalized relations over time, in exchange for changes in behavior. That's
something that has to be pursued.


 Well, Senator Clinton's mention of the Chicago Tribune article back in 2004 I think is a little bit misleading. Because what I was specifically asked about was, if Iran was developing nuclear weapons, how could we respond? And in those situations, what I said is, We should keep options on the table. 

But what I've been consistent about was that this saber-rattling was a
repetition of Iraq, a war I opposed, and that we needed to oppose George Bush
again. We can't keep on giving him the benefit of the doubt, knowing the ways
in which they manipulate intelligence.


 There was another problem with the resolution that we haven't spoken about, and that was that it suggested that we should structure, in some way, our forces in Iraq with the goal of blunting Iranian influence in Iraq. 

Now, this is a problem on a whole bunch of fronts. But number one, the reason
that Iran has been strengthened was because of this misguided war in Iraq.

We installed -- helped to elect a government in Iraq that we knew had
connections with Iran. And so, the notion, somehow, that they're not going to
have influence and that we may be using yet another justification for a
continuing mission in Iraq, I think, is an extreme problem and one of the
reasons why this was a bad idea.


 Well, I think John's point is right, but I want to broaden it a little bit. 

Listen to the Republican candidates' debates and how they frame this issue.
And if you are a Muslim overseas, listening to Rudy Giuliani say, they are
coming here to try to kill you, which is the tenor of many of the speeches
that are delivered by the Republican candidates, you would get an impression
that they are not interested in talking and resolving issues peacefully.

Now, what we need to do is we need to close Guantanamo. We need to restore
habeas corpus. We need to send a strong signal that we are going to talk
directly to, not just our friends, but also to our enemies.

And I have to say that, when I brought this up early on in this campaign, I
was called naive and irresponsible.

And yet -- yet, the point -- the reason for that was not necessarily because
we're going to change Ahmadinejad's mind. It's because we're going to change
the minds of people inside Iran, moderate forces inside Iran, as well as our
Muslim allies around the region, that we are willing to listen to them and try
to engage in finding ways to resolve conflicts cooperatively.


 Well, I think one of the things about the Obama doctrine is it's not going to be as doctrinaire as the Bush doctrine, because the world is complicated. 

And I think part of the problem we've had is that ideology has overridden
facts and reality.

But I think the basic concept, and I've heard it from some of the other folks,
is that increasingly we have to view our security in terms of a common
security and a common prosperity with other peoples and other countries.

And that means that if there are children in the Middle East who cannot read,
that is a potential long-term danger to us. If China is polluting, then
eventually that is going to reach our shores.

We have to work with them cooperatively to solve their problems as well as
ours.


 Well, there are three issues that we have to deal with. 

Number one, is we've got to get our own fiscal house in order. Our leverage is
weakening when we run up enormous deficits funding a war that should have
never been authorized. And we then are taking out the credit card with the
Chinese. That gives us less leverage.

Number two, when I was visiting Africa, I was told by a group of businessmen
that the presence of China is only exceeded by the absence of America in the
entire African continent. And it indicates the unwillingness of our
administration to think strategically about other counties beyond the war on
terror.


 Number three, we have to be tougher negotiators with China. They are not enemies, but they are competitors of ours. 

And on the economic front, on trade issues, on issues importation, we have not
been the best negotiators. And oftentimes, we're negotiating on behalf of Wall
Street, as opposed to on behalf of Main Street.


 Well, right now, the United States is still the dominant superpower in the world. But we have to -- the next president can't be thinking about today; he or she also has to be thinking about 10 years from now, 20 years from now, 50 years from now. 

And if we continue on current trends without dealing with the problems that we
have economically, and unless we are engaging in the world more effectively,
then our influence is going to slip.


 Well, look, I mean, I think Chris and Joe made a good point, which is, we have laws on the books now that aren't being enforced. This is what I mean, in terms of us negotiating more effectively with them. 

Part of the problem is that the relationship has shifted overtime. Joe is
absolutely right that they were much more impoverished 10, 20 years ago.

And so, our general attitude was, You know what? What ever they send in, it
doesn't really impact us that much and they're a poor country.


 Things have now shifted, so -- well, I'll just give you an example. 

I would say toys cannot come in. Food, we will have our own safety inspectors
on the ground.

Japan does this right now. They set up their own inspection standards in China
and they say, Unless you meet our inspection standards, you cannot ship into
here.

If we don't have labor agreements and environmental agreements that are
enforceable, then there are consequences, in terms of them being able to
import into this country.

The point is is that we have a set of tools available to us that have not been
used. And part of the reason is because when we talk about Chinese exports,
oftentimes, we are talking about U.S. companies...


 ... that have moved to China, are manufacturing there and are trying to ship back and they still have influence. 


 And those special interests have to be diminished in their voice in Washington. 


 As I said before, the problem is that we are not using the power that we have. And we just had -- I can't amplify this point enough. Right now, laws, with respect to China, are being made in part with the interests of Wall Street in mind and special interests who are manufacturing in China, used to manufacture here in Iowa -- now are manufacturing in China -- are shipping the goods back here and taking advantage of cheap labor and lower environmental standards. 

We have to have a president -- and this is part of the reason I'm running for
president, is to give a voice to American workers. I believe in trade. And I
think trade can strengthen America.

And I want, by the way, Chinese workers and consumers to benefit. That's good
for our long-term security. But I don't want every single trade decision to be
looked at through the lens of, does this increase corporate profits, as
opposed to, is it good for U.S. consumers and U.S. workers?


 I actually believe that China will modify its behavior if we actually are tough in our negotiations. Look, we are the biggest market for China. They can't afford to just say, See you later. They're going to have to sell here. If we tell them you have to meet certain safety standards, that you have to enforce certain labor and environmental agreements, they will meet them. 

Now, could there potentially be some higher costs on the front end? Probably,
but I guarantee you, I don't meet a single worker in Iowa who's been laid-off
who says, I wouldn't rather pay a little bit more for sneakers at Wal-Mart
(NYSE:WMT) but still have a job.


 Well, we have legislation that says that if, in fact, they are manipulating their currency -- and I think there's no dispute that they are -- that we need to take strong action. It's in the Banking Committee. Chris is presiding over that. 

And now here's the problem. I will say that it's actually a blunt tool. I'd
prefer not doing this legislatively. The problem is we've had a president that
has shown no leadership on it.

So, if and when I am in the White House, I will meet directly with the Chinese
leadership and indicate we have to restore balance. And, by the way, we have
to mobilize our allies, such as the European Union, to have that conversation
with us.

This is an imbalance that is not good for any economy over time. It's not
sustainable, the trade imbalances that we have.

But just to go to a point that was made earlier, so often we see these issues
as contradictory.

Mike Gravel, I am interested, as I said, in making sure that the Chinese
population is fed and clothed and advancing. I think that is important.

It is not, I think, in the long-term interests of China to expand, solely on
the backs of low-wage work that is undermining U.S. work.

If we are saying to China, Raise your labor standards, that will, over time,
improve the lot of Chinese workers, as well as U.S. workers. And that's what
we should be looking at, is: How can we improve the working conditions, the
safety conditions, the consumer protections that are available for all people?
And that's not what's happening right now.


 We do not deputize the American people to do the job that the federal government is supposed to do. So as president of the United States, I will make sure that the federal government does what it's supposed to do, which is to do a better job of closing our borders and preventing hundreds of thousands of people to pour in, have much tougher enforcement standards when it comes to employers, and create a pathway of citizenship for the 12 million people who are already here. 


 The point is that we are not going to have -- we're not going to deputize a whole bunch of American citizens to start grabbing people or turning them in, in part because the ordinary American citizen may not know whether or not this person is illegal or not. 

Now, we should be holding employers accountable, because they have a mechanism
whereby they can actually enforce.

But, you know, the notion that we're going to criminalize priests, for
example, or doctors who are providing services to individuals, and throw them
in jail for doing what their calling asks them to do, which is to provide help
and service to people in need, I think that is a mistake. I think that's out
of America's character.


 Well, look, this requires leadership. I believe that there are circumstances where, in fact, illegal immigrants are driving down wages. 

The question is: How do we fix it? Because, oftentimes, when it's posed that
way, then the thinking is that somehow we have to pit low-wage American
workers versus low-wage immigrant workers.

My answer is to stop illegal workers from coming in, hold employers
accountable, but give the 12 million people who are here illegally, many of
whom have been here for years, many of whom have U.S. citizens for children,
to make sure that they've got a pathway to legalization.

If we do that, then they do have right that they can access.


 No, no, no, no. I think that, if they're illegal, then they should not be able to work in this country. That is part of the principle of comprehensive reform -- that we're going to crack down on employers who are hiring them and taking advantage of them. 

But I also want to give them a pathway so that they can earn citizenship, earn
a legal status, start learning English, pay a significant fine, go to the back
of the line, but they can then stay here and they can have the ability to
enforce a minimum wage that they're paid, make sure the worker safety laws are
available, make sure that they can join a union.


 You've asked a couple of times, Are you going to crack down on January 1st, 2009? 

Listen, I will initiate the process immediately. But to get comprehensive
reform, to get an employer-verification system that works is going to take
some time, just the same way that a pathway to legalization is going to take
some time.

But what it takes is some leadership. Look, two years ago, I worked with about
10 other senators -- McCain, Kennedy, Graham -- an unlikely group -- Brownback
-- and we put together a package that had everything that Senator Clinton and
others have talked about.

It had some provisions we didn't like in it, but we were able to pass it with
a significant majority in the Senate.

But what you have not see over the last several years is leadership from the
president to change the tone and to describe to the American people how we can
be a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.


 No. Because there are Spanish-speaking U.S. citizens who may not speak English well, and if they're seeking help, for example, on some vital health care question or a senior citizen who immigrated here a long time ago, and they're trying to get their Social Security check, I don't want them to not be able to get those services. 


 I completely agree with Chris. Look, a Pew study just came out that shows the next generation; children of Spanish speakers, learn English. 


 You know, they're going to do the same thing that every generation did, so we shouldn't worry about this. 

But on the issue of legal immigration, I think an earlier point was made -- we
have a broken legal immigration system that has to be expedited. That's part
of the problem that we're seeing, whether it's H1B visas or others. It's too
cumbersome, it's often too expensive and unwieldy. That's something I will do
as part of comprehensive immigration reform.


 The issue of climate change. I've put forward one of the most aggressive proposals out there. But the science seems to be coming in indicating it's accelerating even more quickly with every passing day, and by the time I take office I think we're going to have to have a serious conversation about how drastic steps we need to take to address it. 


 We need to put those tax breaks and tax loopholes back into the pockets of hardworking Americans. 


 We are not going to be able to dig ourselves out of that hole in one or two years. But if we can get on a path of sustained growth, if we can end the war in Iraq, end some of the special interest loopholes and earmarks that have been clogging up the system, then I think we can return to a path of a balanced budget. 


 Well, every proposal I've put forward during this campaign, we have paid for. And we have specified where that money is going to come from. 

But let's just look at our tax code, because it's a great example of how we
could provide some relief to ordinary citizens who are struggling to get by.

Right now, we've got a whole host of corporate loopholes and tax savings.
There's a building in the Cayman Islands that houses, supposedly, 12,000
U.S.-based corporations.


 Now, that's either the biggest building in the world or the biggest tax scam in the world. And I think we know which one it is. 

If we close some of those loopholes, that helps me to pay for an offset on the
payroll tax that effects all Americans.

We've put forward tax relief plans for those that are making less than $75,000
a year. That will not only restore fairness to our tax code, but it also puts
money into the pockets of hard-working Americans who need it right now, who
will spend it, and it will actually improve our economic growth over time,
particularly at a time when we're seeing a credit crunch.

But what it requires is some leadership from the White House that restores
that sense that we're all in this together and that we're not just on our own.


 Well, just to emphasize how important prevention and cost savings can be in the Medicare system, it's estimated if we went back to the obesity rates that existed in 1980, that would save the Medicare system $1 trillion. 

So many of the reforms that I've suggested in my health care plan will reduce
costs not just for the overall system, but also for Medicare.


 But one thing I have to say: We are not going to make some of these changes unless we change how business is done in Washington. 

The reason that we can't negotiate for prescription drugs under the Medicare
Prescription Drug Plan is because the drug companies specifically sought and
obtained a provision in that bill that prevented us from doing it.


 And unless we change that politics, we're going to continue to see the waste that we're seeing in the entitlement programs. 


 Thank you, Carolyn. 

You know, 40 years ago, Dr. King challenged America to act on what he called
the fierce urgency of now.

And I feel that urgency today. Our nation's at war. The planet's in peril. And
Americans and Iowans are working harder and harder just to keep pace.

Now, I am confident that we can meet these challenges. I believe we can
provide better economic security, that we can restore our standing in the
world, and that we can make sure that our children have a brighter future.


 But we can only do it if we have the courage to change, if we can bring the country together, if we can push back against the special interests, and if we level with the American people about how we're going to solve our problems. 

That's the kind of campaign I've tried to run, and that's the kind of
president I intend to be.

I ask that all of you caucus for me.


 Well, there's no doubt that NAFTA needs to be amended. And I've already said that I would contact the president of Mexico and the prime minister of Canada, to make sure that the labor and environmental agreements are actually enforceable in the same way that patent protections and other things that are important to corporate America are enforceable. 

But I did want to just go back, briefly, to the issue of trade and human
rights that you had mentioned earlier.


 I think that folks made a terrific point that we have to stand for human rights and that should be part of the trade equation. 

It is harder for us to do it when we have situations like Guantanamo, where we
suspended habeas corpus.

To the extent that we are not being true to our values and our ideals, that
sends a negative message to the world and it gives us less leverage then when
we want to deal with countries that are abusing human rights.

So I think it's part and parcel with a larger program of us restoring the
traditions that made this country great and made us admired around the world.


 This is a moral imperative. I've got a 9-year-old daughter and a 6-year-old daughter. And I want to make sure that the planet is as beautiful for them as it was for me. 

Now, what that means is, there are going to be some increases initially, in
electricity prices, for example, if we have a cap-and- trade system.

Over time, technology will adapt because investors and people who are looking
to make money will see that they can make money through green technologies.
We're already seeing this. In Keokuk, they're just opening a plant right now
that is going to provide 400 well- paying jobs to build wind turbines. And
that's the promise of the future.

But, in order for this to happen, we've got to be courageous enough to not
just talk about it in front of the Sierra Club, or organizations that are
already sympathetic to us.

When I announced my proposal to increase fuel efficiency standards on cars, I
went to Detroit, in front of the auto makers, and said they had to change
their ways.


 And I have to say, the room was really quiet... 

(LAUGHTER)

... and nobody clapped.

(LAUGHTER)

But that's OK, because part of what the next president has to do is not just
tell the American people what they want to hear; has to tell them what they
need to hear.


 I have made as a centerpiece for my world farm agenda that we lower the subsidies, that we cap the subsidies because too many of them are going to agribusiness. 


 We've got folks in Manhattan who are getting farm subsidies. We've got Fortune 500 companies who are getting farm subsidies. And as a consequence, family farms are getting squeezed up and you're seeing more and more consolidation. This is something you hear about all across rural Iowa. 

So what I would do is I would cap those subsidies. I think we have to have a
structure that provides protection to farmers from drought or collapse in
market prices. But we have to take money that is saved, invest in
conservation, invest in organic and alternative crops, invest in nutrition
programs.

Through that process, we can not only save the land, but we can also improve
the economic engines in a lot of these rural communities. And that is
something that I'm absolutely committed to doing as president of the United
States, but it's going to require overcoming the excess influence of
agribusiness in Washington.


 There were elements of the proposal on Tuesday that I think did not make the changes the way I would have approached it. So I probably would have voted against it. 

But there was a vote today that I voted for that would have capped the
subsidies so that it wouldn't be going to these folks who don't deserve it.


 A lot of good ideas have been mentioned. 

Early childhood education, that will close the achievement gap that we see,
particularly for minority children, because often times they are already
behind when they start school.

Not just talking about how great teachers are, but giving them more money and
more support.

Changing No Child Left Behind so that we're not just teaching to a test and
crowding out programs like art and music that are so critical.


 But you asked earlier about sacrifices that I'll ask from the American people. 

One of the things that I want to do is get parents reengaged in instilling a
sense of excellence in their children. And I've said this all across the
country when I talk to parents about education: Government has to fulfill its
obligations to fund education, but parents have to do their job, too.

We've got to turn off the TV set, we've got to put away the video game and we
have to tell our children that education is not a passive activity; it is
something that you have to be actively engaged in.

If we encourage that kind of attitude and our whole community is reinforcing,
then I have no doubt that we can compete with anybody in the world.


 I will call in the Joint Chiefs of Staff and tell them they have a new mission, which is to, in a responsible, careful way, end this war in Iraq, bring our combat troops home. I will initiate the kind of diplomacy that's necessary to stabilize the country and the region as we're pulling out. 


 Number two, I'll call in my new attorney general to review every single executive order that's been issued by George Bush. And any of those that have undermined our Constitution or subverted our civil liberties are going to be reversed. 

Number three, we're going to have an open conversation with all the key
players in the health care arena to make sure that we are moving forward on a
plan to provide coverage to every single American, and to save money so that
we can actually afford it over the long haul.


 I just want to -- I just wanted to make the comment: I've worked with Joe Biden. 


 I've seen his leadership. I have absolutely no doubt about what is in his heart and the commitment that he's made with respect to racial equality in this country. 

So I will provide some testimony, as they say in church...

(LAUGHTER)

... that Joe is on the right side of the issues and is fighting every day for
a better America.


 Well, the -- you know, I am... 

(LAUGHTER)


 Well, Hillary, I'm looking forward to you advising me, as well. 

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)

I want to gather up (inaudible) from everywhere.

You know, we haven't talked too much about the war, but one of the points that
I've tried to make during the course of this year during the campaign is, I
want to change the mindset that got us into war.

Because I think that since 9/11, we've had a president who essentially fed us
a politics of fear and distorted our foreign policy in profound ways.


 And I think that there are a lot of good people, in the Clinton years, the Carter years, George Bush I, who understand that our military power is just one component of our power. 

And I revere what our military does. And I will do whatever it takes, as
commander in chief, to keep the American people safe. But I know that part of
making us safe is restoring our respect in the world.

And I think those who are advising me agree with that. And part of the agenda
that we're putting forward, in terms of talking not just to our friends but
also to our enemies, initiating contacts with Muslim leaders around the world,
doubling our efforts in terms of foreign aid -- all those are designed to
create long-term security by creating long-term prosperity around the world.


 Well, I want to be a better father, be a better husband, and I want to remind myself, constantly, that this is not about me, what I'm doing today. 

It's an enormous strain on the family. And yesterday I went and bought a
Christmas tree with my girls. And we had about two hours before we had to fly
back to Washington to vote. And the only reason that is worth that sacrifice
is if somehow my participation in public life is having a broader impact on
their lives and the lives of children all across the country.


 And so I have to constantly remind myself not to be timid, not to be distorted by the fears of losing in order to make a real difference in the lives of the American people. 


 Well, I think that the Iowa caucuses give people a chance to lift the hood and kick the tires and take us out for a test drive. 

But, you know, what I've been struck by is just the core decency of the
American people. I think their instincts are good.

And sometimes they don't get the information they need, but when they're
presented with good choices, they make the right decision. There's a
generosity of spirit there that I think the next president can tap.

And I'm looking forward to doing well in the caucuses and looking forward to
leading this country.


 Well, I think Hillary said it well. You know, we are right now, I think, in a defining moment in our history. We've got a nation at war, our planet is in peril, and the economy is putting an enormous strain on working families all across the country. 

Now, race has always been an issue in our politics and in this country, but
one of the premises of my campaign and, I think, of the Democratic Party --
and I know that John and Hillary have always been committed to racial equality
-- is that we can't solve these challenges unless we can come together as a
people and we're not resorting to the same -- or falling into the same traps
of division that we have in the past.

I think our party has stood for that. Dr. King stood for that. I hope that my
campaign has inspired that same sense, that there's much more that we hold in
common than what separates us. And -- and that is how I want to move this
campaign forward, and I hope that's how it moves forward.


 Well, not only in hindsight but going forward. 

I think that as Hillary said, our supporters, our staff get overzealous. They
start saying things that I would not say, and it is my responsibility to make
sure that we're setting a clear tone in our campaign. And I take that
responsibility very seriously, which is why I spoke yesterday and sent a
message, in case people were not clear, that what we want to do is make sure
that we focus on the issues.

Now, there are going to be significant issues that we debate and some serious
differences that we have, and I'm sure those will be on display today. What I
am absolutely convinced of is that everybody here is committed to racial
equality, has been historically.

And what I also expect is that I'm going to be judged as a candidate in terms
of how I'm going to be improving the lives of the people of Nevada and people
all across the country -- that they are going to be ultimately making
judgments on can I deliver on good jobs and good wages; can I make sure that
our home foreclosure crisis is adequately dealt with; are we going to be
serious about retirement security; and are we going to have a foreign policy
that makes us safe. And if I'm communicating that message, then I expect to be
judged on that basis. And if I'm not, then I expect to be criticized on that
basis. And that's the kind of campaign that we want to run and that we have
run up until this point.


 No. As I said, you know, I think that if you look not just at this campaign, but at my history -- my belief is that race is a factor in our society. 

But I think what happened in Iowa is a testimony to the fact that the American
public is willing to judge people on the basis of who can best deliver the
kinds of changes that they're so desperately looking for, and that's the kind
of movement that we want to build all across the country. And that, I think,
is the legacy of Dr. King that we need to build on.


 No. I think what happened was that Senator Clinton ran a good campaign up in New Hampshire. And, you know, I think that people recognize we've got some terrific candidates who are running vigorous campaigns. It's going to be close everywhere we go. It's close here in Nevada. It's going to be close in South Carolina. And, you know, at any given moment people are going to be making judgments based on who they think is best speaking to them about the urgent problems that they're facing in this country. 

Now, the one thing I'm convinced about, and this was true in Iowa and this is
true in New Hampshire as well, is that change is going to happen because the
American people determine that change is going to happen. And that's what I
draw from Dr. King's legacy.

You know what happens in Washington is important, and we've got to have
elected officials that are accountable and serious about moving forward on the
goals of opportunity and upward mobility. But if we don't have an activated
people, a unified people -- black, white, Latino, Asian -- who are all moving
in the same direction and demanding that change happens, then Washington
special interests, lobbyists end up dominating the agenda. That's what I want
to change.


 Well, I absolutely regret it, because that wasn't how it was intended. I mean, what -- folks were giving Hillary a hard time about likability, and my intention was to say, I think you're plenty likable. And it did not come out the way it was supposed to. 

But you know, I do think that during the course of that debate, there was a
tendency to parse out what is, I think, not an issue. I think all three of
these candidates are good, capable people. And what we really should be
focusing on is, you know, who's got a vision for how we're going to move the
country forward?

And I believe that right now, the only way we're going to move the country
forward is if we can bring the country together, not just Democrats but
independents, Republicans who have also lost trust in government, and we are
able to push aside the special interests and the lobbyists, and we are
truthful to the American people and enlisting them in changing how our health
care system works, how our economy works, what our tax code looks like. And
that is going to be an issue that, I think, all of us are going to have to
struggle with over the coming days.

It's not going to be an issue of, you know, who's got the nicest smile or, you
know, who's going to be fun to have a beer with. It's going to be who can
provide the leadership that makes sure the country is moving forward through
what I anticipate are going to be some difficult times and who is going to be
able to transform how Washington works in a fundamental way.


 Well, I think what I was describing was how I view the presidency. 

Now, being president is not making sure that schedules are being run properly
or the paperwork is being shuffled effectively. It involves having a vision
for where the country needs to go. It involves having the capacity to bring
together the best people and being able to spark the kind of debate about how
we're going to solve health care, how we're going to solve energy, how we are
going to deliver good jobs with good wages, how we're going to keep people in
their homes here in Nevada, and then being able to mobilize and inspire the
American people to get behind that agenda for change. That's the kind of a
leadership that I've shown in the past. That's the kind of leadership that I
intend to show as president of the United States.

So what's -- what's needed is sound judgment, a vision for the future, the
capacity to tap into the hopes and dreams of the American people and mobilize
them to push aside those special interests and lobbyists and forces that are
standing in the way of real change -- and making sure that you have a
government that reflects the decency and the generosity of the American
people. That's the kind of leadership that I believe I can provide.


 My greatest strength, I think, is the ability to bring people together from different perspectives, to get them to recognize what they have in common and to move people in a different direction. 

And as I indicated before, my greatest weakness, I think, is when it comes to
-- I'll give you a very good example. I ask my staff never to hand me paper
until two seconds before I need it, because I will lose it. (Laughter.) You
know. The -- you know. And my desk in my office doesn't look good. I've got to
have somebody around me who is keeping track of that stuff. And that's not
trivial. I need to have good people in place who can make sure that systems
run. That's what I've always done. And that's why we've run not only a good
campaign but a good U.S. Senate office.


 Well, I -- there's no doubt that you've got to be a good manager, and that's not what I was arguing. 

The point in terms of bringing together a team is that you get the best
people, and you're able to execute and hold them accountable. But I think that
there -- there's something, if we're going to evaluate George Bush and his
failures as president, that I think are much more important. He was very
efficient. He was on time all the time and, you know, had -- (laughter) -- you
know, I -- I'm sure he never lost a paper. I'm sure he knows where it is.
(Laughter.)

What -- what -- what he -- what he could not do -- what he could not do is to
listen to perspectives that didn't agree with his ideological predispositions.
What he could not do is to bring in different people with different
perspectives and get them to work together. What he could not do is to manage
the -- the effort to make sure that the American people understood that if
we're going to go into war, that there are going to be consequences and there
are going to be costs.

And we have to be able to communicate what those costs are and to make
absolutely certain that if we're going to make a decision to send our young
men and women into harm's way, that it's based on the best intelligence and
that we've asked tough questions before we went in to fight.

I mean, those are -- those are the kinds of failures that have to do with
judgment, they have to do with vision, the capacity to inspire people. They
don't have to do with whether or not he was managing the bureaucracy properly.
That's not to deny that there has to be strong management skills in the
presidency. It is to say that what has been missing is the ability to bring
people together, to mobilize the country to move us in a better direction, and
to be straight with the American people. That's how you get the American
people involved.


 Well, look, first of all, let's make clear what the facts are. 

I am a Christian. I have been sworn in with a Bible. I pledge allegiance and
lead the Pledge of Allegiance sometime in the United States Senate, when I'm
presiding. I haven't been there lately because I've been in Iowa and New
Hampshire. (Laughter.)

But you know, look, in the Internet age, there are going to be lies that are
spread all over the place. I have been victimized by these lies. Fortunately
the American people are, I think, smarter than folks give them credit for. And
you know, it's a test. These e- mails were going out in Iowa; they were going
out in New Hampshire. And we did just fine. If we didn't do well, for example,
in New Hampshire, it wasn't because of these e-mails. It was because we didn't
do what we needed to do in our campaign.

So my job is to tell the truth, to be straight with the American people about
how I intend to end climate change, what I'm going to do with respect to
providing health care for every American, how we're going to provide tax
relief to hard-working Americans who are really feeling the pinch, and to
present my vision for where the country needs to go. If I'm doing that
effectively, then I place my trust in the American people that they will sort
out the lies from the truth and they will make a good decision.


 Well, it's not a rebuttal. I just want to pick up on a couple things that have been said. 

Number one, part of the reason that Kuwait and others are able to come in and
purchase, or at least bail out, some of our financial institutions is because
we don't have an energy policy. And we are sending close to a billion dollars
a day.

And this administration has consistently failed to put forward a realistic
plan that is going to reduce our dependence on foreign oil, is going to invest
in solar and wind and biodiesel. You look at a state like Nevada. One thing I
note is folks have got a lot of sun here, and yet we have not seen any serious
effort on the part of this administration to spur on the use of alternative
fuels, raise fuel efficiency standards on cars. That would make a substantial
difference in our balance of payments, and that would make a substantial
difference in terms of their capacity to purchase our assets.

And the second thing I just want to point out is that the -- the sub-prime
lending mess, part of the reason it happened was because we had an
administration that does not believe in any kind of oversight. And we had the
mortgage industry spending $185 million on lobbying to prevent provisions such
as the ones that I proposed over a year ago that would say, you know, you've
got to disclose properly what kinds of loans you're giving to people on
mortgages. You've got to disclose if you've got a teaser rate and suddenly
their mortgage payments are going to jack up and they can't pay for them.

And one of the things that I intend to do as president of the United States is
restore a sense of accountability and regulatory oversight over the financial
markets. We have the best financial markets in the world, but only if they are
transparent and accountable and people trust them. And increasingly, we have
not had those structures in place.


 I opposed them both. I think they were bad ideas, because they were pushed by the credit card companies, they were pushed by the mortgage companies, and they put the interests of those banks and financial institutions ahead of the interests of the American people. And this is typical. 

Now, Hillary's exactly right, but we've got to modify some of the fraudulent
practices, predatory lending practices. I put in a bill a year and a half ago
to make that happen because it does affect communities, including my own on
the South Side of Chicago.

But unless we are able to rid the influence of special interest lobbies in
Washington, we're going to continue to see bad legislation like that. And
that's why we're going to have to change how politics is done in Washington.

Now, we have an immediate problem. I met with a number of folks up in Reno,
just two days ago, who are already seeing their homes being foreclosed upon.

One of the things that we have to do is we have to release people who are in
bankruptcy as a consequence of health care. We've got to give them a break.
One woman who I was with -- her husband is a police officer. He contracted
cancer, went through chemotherapy, ends up being hit by a car while on -- in
the line of duty, and they fall three, four months behind on their health care
payments, and that's it. They can't make the payments on their house. We've
got to provide them some relief.

We've -- I've put forward a $10 billion housing fund that can help bridge
people who have been responsible in making their payments. They're not
speculators, they're not trying to flip properties, they're in their own
homes. We've got to make sure that they can get the kinds of help that they
need to stay in their homes and make the payments and live out the American
dream that is so important to so many people.


 Well, let's be clear, John. I just want to make sure that we understand. I don't take money from federal lobbyists. I don't take money from PACs. 


 As you don't either. 

What happens is, is that you've got -- if you've got a mid-level executive at
a drug company or insurance company who is inspired by my message of change,
and they send me money, then that's recorded as money from the drug or the
insurance industry, even though it's not organized, coordinated or in any way
subject to the problems that you see when lobbyists are given money. But --
and I'm proud of the fact that I've raised more money from small donors than
anybody else, and that we're getting 25, 50, $100 donations, and we've done
very well doing it that way.

Now, what I'm also proud of is the fact that in reducing special interest
lobbying, I alone of the candidates here have actually taken away the power of
lobbyists. Part of the reason that you know who's bundling money for various
candidates is because of a law I passed this year which says, lobbyists, if
you are taking money from anybody and putting it together and then giving it
to a member of Congress, that has to be disclosed. Ultimately what I'd like to
see is a system of public financing of campaigns, and I'm a cosponsor of the
proposal that's in the Senate right now.

That's what we have to fight for.

In the meantime, what I'm very proud of is to make sure that we continue to
make progress at the federal level to push back the influence that lobbyists
have right now. And that's something that I'm going to continue to work on.


 Well, I think, you know, we -- we can work on this, Hillary, because I -- I don't think -- (laughter) -- you know, the -- we got unity in the Democratic Party, I hope, on this. 

The notion that President Bush could somehow tie the hands of the next
president I think is contrary to how our democracy's supposed to work, and the
voices of the American people who spoke out in 2006 and I expect will speak
out again in 2008.

I have opposed this war consistently. I have put forward a plan that will get
our troops out by the end of 2009. And we already saw today reports that the
Iraqi minister suggests that we're going to be in there at least until 2018.
2018, 10 years -- a decade-long commitment. Currently, we are spending nine
(billion dollars) to $10 billion a month. And the notion is that we are going
to sustain that at the same time as we're neglecting what we see happening in
Afghanistan right now, where you have a luxury hotel in Kabul that was blown
up by militants and the situation continues to worsen.

My first job as president of the United States is going to be to call in the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and say, "You've got a new mission," and that is to
responsibly, carefully, but deliberately start to phase out our involvement
there and to make sure that we are putting the onus on the Iraqi government to
come together and do what they need to do to arrive at peace.


 No, no, no. There's nothing different, Tim. 

(LAUGHTER)

I want to make sure...

(LAUGHTER)


 No, no. I think this is important because it was reported as if we were suggesting that we would continue the war until 2013. Your question was, could I guarantee all troops would be out of Iraq. I have been very specific in saying that we will not have permanent bases there. I will end the war as we understand it in combat missions. 

But that we are going to have to protect our embassy. We're going to have to
protect our civilians. We're engaged in humanitarian activity there. We are
going to have to have some presence that allows us to strike if Al Qaida is
creating bases inside of Iraq.

So I cannot guarantee that we're not going to have a strategic interest that I
have to carry out as commander-in-chief to maintain some troop presence there,
but it is not going to be engaged in a war and it will not be this sort of
permanent bases and permanent military occupation that George Bush seems to be
intent on.


 I just want to pick up on what John said, because we've had this discussion before. John, are you saying that you're -- I don't know if I'm using my question here, but... 


 Well, I've got to be careful, then. 

(LAUGHTER)

Instead of phrasing it that way...

(LAUGHTER)


 Let me... 


 Look, I think it's important to understand that either you are willing to say that you may go after terrorist bases inside of Iraq if they should form, in which case there would potentially be a combat aspect to that, obviously, or you're not. 


 And, you know, if you're not, then that could present some problems in terms of the long-term safety and security of the United States of America. So I just wanted to make sure that we got that clarification. 


 John... 


 I'm sorry. 


 Let me suggest, I think there's a distinction without a difference here. If it is appropriate for us to keep that strike force outside of Iraq, then that obviously would be preferable. 

The point is, at some point you might have that capacity, and that's the --
that's the clarification I want to make sure...


 Yes. One of the striking things, as you travel around the country, you go into rural communities and you see how disproportionally they are carrying the load in this war in Iraq, as well as Afghanistan. 


 And it is not fair. Now, the volunteer Army, I think, is a way for us to maintain excellence. And if we are deploying our military wisely, then a voluntary army is sufficient, although I would call for an increase in our force structure, particularly around the Army and the Marines, because I think that we've got to put an end to people going on three, four, five tours of duty and the strain on families is enormous. I meet them every day. 

But I think that the obligation to serve exists for everybody, and that's why
I've put forward a national service program that is tied to my tuition credit
for students who want to go to college. You get $4000 every year to help you
go to college.

In return, you have to engage in some form of national service. Military
service has to be an option.


 We have to have civilian options as well. Not just the Peace Corps, but one of the things that we need desperately are people who are in our foreign service who are speaking foreign languages can be more effective in a lot of the work that's going to be require that may not be hand-to-hand combat but is going to be just as critical in ensuring our long-term safety and security. 


 There just one thing that I wanted to... 


 Very briefly, because I think this shows you how this administration has failed when it comes to our veterans. 

I went to Walter Reed to talk to the wounded warriors who had come back to
discover that they were still paying for their meals and their phone calls
while in Walter Reed, while rehabbing, which I could not believe. And I was
able to gain the cooperation of a Republican- controlled Senate at the time
and pass a bill that would eliminate that.

But that indicates the callousness with which we are often treating our
veterans. That has to stop.


 I will end the notion of Yucca Mountain because it has not been based on the sort of sound science that can assure the people in Nevada that they're going to be safe. And that, I think, was a mistake. 

Now, you hate to see billions of dollars having already been spent on a
mistake, but what I don't want to do is spend additional billions of dollars
and potentially create a situation that is not safe for the people of Nevada.
So I've already -- I've been clear from the start that Yucca, I think, was a
misconceived project. We are going to have to figure out how are we storing
nuclear waste.

And what I want to do is to get the best experts around the table and make a
determination: What are our options based on the best science available? And I
think there's a solution that can be had that's good for the country but also
good for the people of Nevada.


 Well, I think it's a testimony to my commitment and opposition to Yucca Mountain that despite the fact that my state has more nuclear power plants than any other state in the country, I've never supported Yucca Mountain. So I just want to make that clear. 


 Well, the reason I voted for it was because it was the single largest investment in clean energy (NASDAQ:CLNE) -- solar, wind, biodiesel -- that we had ever seen. And I think it is -- we talked about this earlier -- if we are going to deal with our dependence on foreign oil, then we're going to have to ramp up how we're producing energy here in the United States. 

Now, with respect to nuclear energy, what I have said is that if we could
figure out a way to provide a cost-efficient, safe way to produce nuclear
energy, and we knew how to store it effectively, then we should pursue it
because what we don't want is to produce more greenhouse gases. And I believe
that climate change is one of the top priorities that the next president has
to pursue.

Now, if we cannot solve those problem, then absolutely, John, we shouldn't
build more plants. But part of what I want to do is to create a menu of energy
options, and let's see where the science and the technology and the
entrepreneurship of the American people take us.


 That's why I want to set up a cap and trade system. We're going to cap greenhouse gases. We're going to say to every polluter that's sending greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, "We're going to charge you a dollar -- we're going to charge you money for every unit of greenhouse gas that you send out there." That will create a market. It will generate billions of dollars that we can invest in clean technology. 

And if nuclear energy can't meet the rigors of the marketplace -- if it's not
efficient and if we don't solve those problems -- then that's off the table.
And I hope that we can find an energy mix that's going to deliver us from the
kinds of problems that we have right now.


 Well, I think that one thing that we haven't talked as much about that we need to is reducing the consumption of energy. We are inefficient, and oftentimes during the presidential campaign, people have asked, what do we expect out of the American people in bringing about real change. 

This is an example of where ordinary citizens have to make a change. We are
going to have to make our buildings more efficient. We're going to have to
make our lighting more efficient. We're going to have to make our appliances
more efficient. That is actually the low-hanging fruit if we're going to deal
with climate change. That's the thing that we can do most rapidly.

And there's no reason why, with the kind of presidential leadership that I
intend to provide, that we can't make drastic cuts in the amount of energy
that we consume without any drop in our standard of living.


 Not in Illinois. They all voted for me. And so... 

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)

You know, if this is being asked in the context of my candidacy, one of the
things that I know is that, when Latino voters know of my commitment to them
and the work that I've done for years, then they gravitate toward my
candidacy.

We were talking earlier about immigration reform.


 I think that John and myself and Hillary may agree on the broad outlines of where we need to go, but two years ago I stood with Ted Kennedy and John McCain and took on this tough issue, and have consistently been involved in making sure that we've got the kind of comprehensive plan that makes us a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. 

That's the kind of leadership that I've shown. And when Latino voters read or
hear about that leadership, then they know that they're going to have an
advocate even if it's politically tough.

And I think that's, you know, that's the real test of leadership -- not when
it's easy, not when the things poll well, but how you do when you've got a
contentious issue like how we solve this immigration problem. That's an area
where I've consistently stepped up.


 Well, I think it's similar to the reason that Latinos have such a high dropout rate. What you see consistently are children at a very early age are starting school already behind. 

And that's why I've said that I'm going to put billions of dollars into early
childhood education that makes sure that our African-American youth, Latino
youth, poor youth of every race, are getting the kind of help that they need
so that they know their numbers, their colors, their letters.

Every dollar that we spend in early childhood education, we get $10 back in
reduced dropout rates, improved reading scores. That's the kind of commitment
we have to make early on.


 We've got to improve K through 12. And that means not just talking about how great teachers are but rewarding them for their greatness by giving them higher salaries and giving them more support and professional development; and making sure that No Child Left Behind is not a tool to punish people, and we're not just basing how we fund our schools on a standardized test. 

We need after-school programs and summer-school programs because minority
youth and poor youth are less likely to get the kind of environment and
supplemental activities that they need.

But let's be clear: We have good answers for how to make these schools work.
What we don't have is a sense of urgency in the White House.

And, you know, I was raised by a single mom and my grandparents. I did not get
money and privilege when I was young. But I did get a good education. And
we've got to have that attitude for every single child in America.

And that also means -- last point I'll make, because sometimes this doesn't
get talked enough about. We have to have our parents take their jobs
seriously, and particularly African-American fathers who all too often are
absent from the home, have not encouraged the kind of, you know, nurturing of
our children that they need.


 And as somebody who grew up without a father, I know how important that is. That is something that, as president, I intend to talk about. 

The schools can't do it all by themselves. Parents have to parent.


 I don't think that we can get that done. But what I do think we can do is to provide just some common-sense enforcement. One good example -- this is consistently blocked -- the efforts by law enforcement to obtain the information required to trace back guns that have been used in crimes to unscrupulous gun dealers. 

That's not something that the NRA has allowed to get through Congress. And, as
president, I intend to make it happen.

But here's the broader context that I think is important for us to remember.
We essentially have two realities, when it comes to guns, in this country.
You've got the tradition of lawful gun ownership, that all of us saw, as we
travel around rural parts of the country.

And it is very important for many Americans to be able to hunt, fish, take
their kids out, teach them how to shoot.

And then you've got the reality of 34 Chicago public school students who get
shot down on the streets of Chicago.

We can reconcile those two realities by making sure the Second Amendment is
respected and that people are able to lawfully own guns, but that we also
start cracking down on the kinds of abuses of firearms that we see on the
streets.


 Well, I think there's no doubt that we've been dominated by a politics of fear since 9/11. Now, some of that's understandable. We have real enemies out there. The tragedy in New York was a trauma to the country that it is going to take a long time for us to work out. 

And Senator Clinton did good work in terms of helping the city recover. But I
have to say that when Senator Clinton uses the specter of a terrorist attack
with a new prime minister during a campaign, I think that is part and parcel
with what we've seen the use of the fear of terrorism in scoring political
points. And I think that's a mistake. Now, I don't want to perpetuate that.


 I think that's part of why we ended up going into Iraq and made a big strategic error that has made us less safe. Resources that could have been spent on homeland security have been spent in Baghdad. Resources that could have been spent hunting down bin Laden have been diverted to Iraq. 

And that's what happens when your judgment is clouded. And what I intend to do
as president of the United States is to be honest and straightforward with the
American people about how I'm going to implement all the 9/11 Commission
report findings, make sure that we are hunting down bin Laden, getting out of
Iraq so that we can refocus our attention on building the networks and
alliances that are required to reduce terrorism around the world.

That's going to be my priority, and that's part of the reason I'm running for
president of the United States.


 It was December of '06 while I was on vacation with my wife and kids. 

And, you know, I asked myself two big questions: Number one, could my family
survive the rigors of a presidential campaign, since I've got two young
children?

And because my wife is extraordinary and my children are above average, I
figured they could manage it.

(LAUGHTER)

But the most important question was not at whether I could win the presidency,
but whether I should.

Was there something that I could provide this country, in terms of leadership,
that would be -- that I could do more effectively than any other candidate?

And I concluded I could bring the country together, break out of some the old
arguments, make sure that we are speaking honestly with the American people,
bringing them in to the process of change.


 Well, we do meet on the King holiday. And I think it's important to remember that, in the march on Washington, where Dr. King always talks about -- or it's always repeated, the dream speech that is so famous -- that march was for jobs, as well as justice.

And, unfortunately, we have not made the kind of progress that we need in
having a balanced economy, and George Bush has made it worse.

George Bush has consistently skewed our tax code to the wealthy. He has
squandered billions of dollars in a war that I believe should never have been
authorized and should have never been waged.

(APPLAUSE)

We have not made the investments that are needed in our school system. You
travel around South Carolina along the corridor of shame, and you've got
children who are going to schools that were built in the 1800s. And they are
not able to compete in an international economy.

So it is absolutely critical right now to give a stimulus to the economy. And
Senator Clinton mentioned tax rebates. That wasn't the original focus of her
plan. I think recently she has caught up with what I had originally said,
which is we've got to get taxes into the -- tax cuts into the pockets of hard-
working Americans right away.

And it is important for us to make sure that they are not just going to the
wealthy. They should be going to folks who are making $75,000 a year or less,
and they should be going to folks who only pay payroll tax, but typically are
not paying income tax.

If we do that, then not only can we stimulate the economy, those are the folks
who are most likely to spend money right away.


 Well, I think that we are going to have to get some immediate money. What I do is I say, for a typical family, $500 for a tax rebate per family.

But also, for senior citizens, get a supplement to their Social Security
check, because they get that every month. We know exactly how to do it. And
that would provide seniors all across the country right away some money to
help pay for their heating bills and other expenses that they've got right
now.


 Let me just respond to a couple of things. I think the idea of bringing jobs is important, which is why that's central to my energy plan. But, Wolf, you're exactly right, that is a long-term agenda. That is not going to deal with the immediate crisis we have right now.

You've got the European markets dropped 5 percent. The expectation is that the
Dow Jones tomorrow may do the same. We could be sliding into an extraordinary
recession unless we stimulate the economy immediately. That's point number
one.

Point number two, on trade, John is exactly right that you travel around South
Carolina and you see the textile mills that John's father worked in closed,
all over the region. And it is absolutely true that NAFTA was a mistake.

I know that Hillary on occasion has said -- just last year said this was a
boon to the economy. I think it has been devastating, because our trade
agreements did not have labor standards and environmental standards that would
assure that workers in the U.S. were getting a square deal.

But the only thing I want to differ on John is this whole notion of Peru. The
Peru trade deal had labor and environmental agreements in it. Peru is an
economy the size of New Hampshire. Over 90 percent of the goods coming from
Peru already come in under various free trade agreements.

And, John, you voted for permanent trade relations with China, which I think
anybody who looks at how we structure trade in this country would tell you has
been the biggest beneficiary and the biggest problem that we have with respect
to trade, particularly because they're still manipulating the currency.


 Well, the only point I would make is that in a year's time, it'll be me who's enforcing them.

(APPLAUSE)

And so we're going to make sure that the right thing is being done. And, John,
you tell an extraordinarily powerful story. I mean, you understand what's
happened with respect to trade here and I think it is powerful when you talk
about it.

But keep in mind, I first moved to Chicago to be a community organizer with
churches who were trying to deal with the devastation of steel plants that had
closed in that region. And so I spent 3.5 years working alongside folks who
had lost their jobs.

And I know what it's like for families to have put their life and their heart
and soul into a company, building profits for shareholders, and then suddenly
they had the rug pulled out from under them. Not only have they lost their
job, they've lost their health care, they've lost their pension benefits.

And it is absolutely critical for us to understand that NAFTA was an enormous
problem. The permanent trade relations with China, without some of the
enforcement mechanisms that were in there, that you voted for, was also a
significant problem.

And we've got to all move forward as Democrats to make sure that we've got
trade deals that work for working people and not just for corporate profits.


 What she said wasn't true. We account for every single dollar that we propose.

Now, this, I think, is one of the things that's happened during the course of
this campaign, that there's a set of assertions made by Senator Clinton, as
well as her husband, that are not factually accurate.

And I think that part of what the people are looking for right now is somebody
who's going to solve problems and not resort to the same typical politics that
we've seen in Washington.

(APPLAUSE)

That is something that I hear all across the country. So when Senator Clinton
says -- or President Clinton says that I wasn't opposed to the war from the
start or says it's a fairytale that I opposed the war, that is simply not
true.

When Senator Clinton or President Clinton asserts that I said that the
Republicans had had better economic policies since 1980, that is not the case.

Now, the viewers aren't concerned with this kind of back-and-forth. What
they're concerned about is who's actually going to help the get health care,
how are they going to get their kids...

(APPLAUSE)

... going to college, and that's the kind of campaign I've tried to run. I
think that's the kind of campaign we should all try to run.

(APPLAUSE)


 We're off topic, but...


 Let's talk about it.

Hillary, I will be happy to provide you with the information about all -- all
the spending that we do. Now, let's talk about Ronald Reagan. What you just
repeated here today is...


 Wait. No. Hillary, you just spoke.


 You just spoke for two minutes.


 You just...


 Hillary, I'm sorry. You just...


 Hillary, we just had the tape. You just said that I complimented the Republican ideas. That is not true.

What I said -- and I will provide you with a quote -- what I said was is that
Ronald Reagan was a transformative political figure because he was able to get
Democrats to vote against their economic interests to form a majority to push
through their agenda, an agenda that I objected to. Because while I was
working on those streets watching those folks see their jobs shift overseas,
you were a corporate lawyer sitting on the board at Wal-Mart.

(APPLAUSE)


 I was fighting these fights. I was fighting these fights. So -- but I want to be clear.

So I want to be clear. What I said had nothing to do with their policies. I
spent a lifetime fighting a lifetime against Ronald Reagan's policies. But
what I did say is that we have to be thinking in the same transformative way
about our Democratic agenda.

We've got to appeal to Independents and Republicans in order to build a
working majority to move an agenda forward. That is what I said.

(APPLAUSE)


 Now, you can dispute that, but let me finish.

Hillary, you went on for two minutes. Let me finish.

The irony of this is that you provided much more fulsome praise of Ronald
Reagan in a book by Tom Brokaw that's being published right now, as did -- as
did Bill Clinton in the past. So these are the kinds of political games that
we are accustomed to.


 Go ahead and address what you said about...


 Your husband did.


 OK. Well, I can't tell who I'm running against sometimes.

(APPLAUSE)


 I didn't say they were good ones.


 Well, I didn't say they were good ones.


 All right, Wolf.


 I agree.


 No, no, no.


 I think that we need to help them. I think it is important to make sure that we're not helping out the speculators, but instead are helping out the homeowners who are actually living in their homes, who have the capacity to make the payments if they're not seeing a huge increase in their mortgage payments.

But understand this, this is not new. We have a history in this country of
preying on low-income peoples because they don't have access to banks. The
Community Reinvestment Act is oftentimes not enforced as it should be.

We've got to open up bank branches. We've got to give people access to
financing so that they're not going to a payday loan operation.

I two years ago introduced a provision that would eliminate predatory lending,
something that I had already helped to get passed at the state level. But it
is important for us to understand that we've got to give ordinary working
people access to financing. And it's important to understand that part of the
reason that they are borrowing on their homes, they're borrowing on credit
cards, is that the banks and financial institutions have dominated policy in
Washington.

And this is an area where I've got a policy disagreement with Senator Clinton.
When we talked a while back, just in the last debate, we talked about the
bankruptcy bill, which had been pushed by the banks and the financial
institutions, that said, basically, it will be harder for folks who have been
lured into these teaser rates and then see their credit cards go up to 30
percent, that they would have a tougher time getting out of bankruptcy.

In the last debate, Senator Clinton said she voted for it but hoped that it
wouldn't pass. Now, I don't understand that approach to legislation. I think
it is important for us to stand up to these special interests consistently,
all the time, and that's what I've done and that's what I will continue to...


 I'm happy to respond. Here's what happened: I was an associate at a law firm that represented a church group that had partnered with this individual to do a project and I did about five hours worth of work on this joint project. That's what she's referring to.

Now, it's fine for her to throw that out, but the larger reason that I think
this debate is important is because we do have to trust our leaders and what
they say. That is important, because if we can't, then we're not going to be
able to mobilize the American people behind bringing about changes in health
care reform, bringing about changes in how we're going to put people back to
work, changing our trade laws. And consistency matters. Truthfulness during
campaigns makes a difference.

(APPLAUSE)

And that's what I've tried to do and I will continue to try to do as president
of the United States.


 That's...


 Absolutely. It is a fact, because I thought 30 percent potentially was too high of a ceiling. So we had had no hearings...

(APPLAUSE)

... on that bill. It had not gone through the Banking Committee. I don't know
about a lot of folks here, most folks here, if they've got a credit card, are
paying 29 percent. So under this provision, that would've been fine.

And we had not created the kind of serious...


 That is exactly what I just said, John, because...


 ... there had been no discussions...

(APPLAUSE)

Hold on, John. Hold on. Listen to this. There had been no discussion about how
we were going to structure this and this was something that had not gone
through the committee and we hadn't talked about.

It didn't make sense for us to cap interest rates...


 No.


 Hillary, I opposed that bill and you know I did.

(APPLAUSE)


 And consistently did and unlike you and John who voted for it previously.

But here's the point. What we have to do is we've got to have consistency in
how we vote. You can't say one thing during the campaign trail and then
apologize afterward and say it was a mistake, and that has repeatedly happened
during the course of this campaign...

(APPLAUSE)

... and I think that tells you the kind of president that folks are going to
be.


 I feel bad for John...

BLITZER (?): I know.

(APPLAUSE)


 ... because I know John's not getting a lot of time here.

Let me just respond to this.

BLITZER (?): You can...


 I feel pretty bad, I do. I feel pretty bad. But let's just respond to the example that was just thrown out.

The bill with respect to privacy for victims of sexual abuse is a bill I had
actually sponsored, Hillary. I actually sponsored the bill. It got through the
senate.

(APPLAUSE)

That was on the back of 12 other provisions that I was able to pass in the
state legislature. Nobody has worked harder than me in the Illinois state
legislature to make sure that victims of sexual abuse were dealt with, partly
because I've had family members who were victims of sexual abuse and I've got
two daughters who I want to protect.

What happened on that particular provision was that after I had sponsored it
and helped to get it passed, it turned out that there was a legal provision in
it that was problematic and needed to be fixed so that it wouldn't be struck
down.

But when you comb my 4,000 votes in Illinois, choose one...

(APPLAUSE)

... try to present it in the worst possible light, that does have to be
answered. That does have to be answered.


 And as I said before, the reason this makes a difference -- and I understand that most viewers want to know, how am I going to get helped in terms of paying my health care? How am I going to get help being able to go to college?

All those things are important. But what's also important that people are not
just willing to say anything to get elected. And...

(APPLAUSE)


 ... that's what I have tried to do in this campaign, is try to maintain a certain credibility.

I don't mind having policy debates with Senator Clinton or Senator Edwards.
But what I don't enjoy is spending the week or two weeks or the last month
having to answer to these kinds of criticisms that are not factually accurate.

(APPLAUSE)


 And the press has looked at them. They are not accurate. And you need to present them as accurate.


 I'll be happy to answer it. Because in Illinois - in Illinois, oftentimes you vote present in order to indicate that you had problems with a bill that otherwise you might be willing to vote for. And oftentimes you would have a strategy that would help move the thing forward.

Keep in mind, John, I voted for 4,000 bills. And if you want to know whether
or not I worked on tough stuff, I passed the first racial...


 No, no, no. Hold on a second.


 No, no. But you...


 Right.


 No.


 Right.


 John -- John, Illinois...


 Hold on a second.


 John, you...


 You asked for the -- most of these did not have political consequences. This -- most of these were technical problems with a piece of legislation that ended up getting modified.

But let's talk about taking on tough votes. I mean, I am somebody who led on
reforming a death penalty system that was broken in Illinois, that nobody
thought was good politics, but was the right

thing to do.

(APPLAUSE)


 I opposed legislation that now is being used against me politically to make sure that juveniles were not put in the criminal justice system as adults, even though it was not the smart thing to do politically. It was not smart for me to oppose the war at the start of this war, but I did so because it was the right thing to do.

(APPLAUSE)


 So I understand that Illinois has a different system than Congress, and that it is fine to try to use that politically. But don't question, John, the fact that on issue after issue that is important to the American people, I haven't simply followed, I have lead.


 It does not.


 Well, because I think we've got limited resources. And it is important for us that, when we've got millions of U.S. citizens that aren't yet covered, it's important for us to make sure that they are provided coverage.

I do think that we have an obligation to make sure that children are covered.
And we want to make sure that they are not sick in the emergency room.

But the critical issue on these various plans is, how are we going to actually
get it done?

Because, you know, I respect the fact that Senator Clinton and President
Clinton attempted in '93 to get health care reform passed. But I do think that
they did it in the wrong way, because it was behind closed doors, and we did
not enlist the American people in the process.

The only way we're going to be able to overcome the insurance companies, and
the drug companies, and the HMOs who are profiting from the current system is
if we are having all these negotiations in a public setting, we are very clear
about who's carrying water for the drug companies and the insurance companies,
and who is looking out for the families who, day to day, are struggling.

All of us, all three of us have met people every day in our travels across the
country who, even if they have health care, are looking at such high premiums
that effectively it's not really health insurance, it's house insurance.

They're paying premiums, in case they get hit by a car, they don't lose their
home. But they never go to a doctor.

And we've got to put responsibility not just on the next president, but also
on Congress to make sure it happens. And that means that we've got to have the
American people clear about the choices that we face.


 Well, a couple of points.


 A couple of points. John, I think, is aware I don't take PAC money. I don't take money from federal lobbyists. I'm not taking money from their companies.

It is true that there are employees of all sorts of companies that have given
to my campaign because, frankly, I've raised a lot of money, and sometimes in
$25, $50, $100 donations.

But that does mean that I've gotten a bunch of money from drug lobbyists. And
I think it's important to make that distinction, John.


 Point number two. With respect to universal coverage, understand what this debate is about. And this is a legitimate policy debate. And I respect the positions that John and Hillary have taken.

They have decided that we should mandate coverage for all adults. I believe
that the problem -- and understand what that means. A mandate means that, in
some fashion, everybody will be forced to buy health insurance.

Now, John has been honest that that may mean taking money out of people's
paychecks in order to make sure that they're covered. Senator Clinton has not
been clear about how that mandate would be enforced.

But I believe the problem is not that folks are trying to avoid getting health
care; the problem is they can't afford it.

(APPLAUSE)

And that's why my plan emphasizes lowering costs, not only setting up a
government plan so that people who don't have health insurance can buy into it
and will get subsidized, but also making sure that those who have health
insurance -- because, keep in mind, we've got millions of Americans all across
the country who have health insurance, but are struggling with rising co-
payments, deductibles, premiums.

Under George Bush, families are paying 78 percent more on health care than
they were previously -- let me just finish, because this is an important
policy point. We put in a catastrophic re-insurance plan that will help reduce
those premiums for families by an average of about $2,500 per year.

But the last point that I think is worth making, every expert that's looked at
this has said there is not a single person out there who's going to want
health care who will not get it under my plan.

And it's true that some people could game the system by just waiting until
they get sick and then they show up. But keep in mind that my plan also says
children will be able to stay on the parents' plan up until the age of 25.

And so I don't believe that there are a whole bunch of folks out there that
will not get coverage.

And, John, both you and Hillary have a hardship exemption, where, if people
can't afford to buy health care, you exempt them, so that you sort of don't
count them.


 But you don't cover them.


 No.


 Right, exactly.

Here's the policy question: if, in fact, we are not making it affordable
enough, which is what's happening right now, and you mandate on families to
buy health insurance that they can't afford and if they don't buy it you fine
them or in some other way take money for them -- this is what's happening...


 John, I haven't finished. John, let me finish.


 Now, what is happening in Massachusetts right now -- there are articles being written about it -- which is that folks are having to pay fines and they don't have health care. They'd rather go ahead and take the fine because they can't afford the coverage.

My core belief is that people desperately want coverage. They desperately want
it, and my plan provides those same subsidies. And if they are provided those
subsidies and they have good, quality care that's available, then they will
purchase it. That is my belief.

Now, it's fine for us to have a debate about how the best way to get there is,
but to suggest somehow that I'm not interested in having anybody covered, or
to suggest, as Hillary just did, that I was in favor of single payer -- I
never said that we should try to go ahead and get single payer. What I said
was that if I were starting from scratch, if we didn't have a system in which
employers had typically provided health care, I would probably go with a
single-payer system.

What's evolved, Hillary, is your presentation of my positions, which is what's
happened frequently during the course of this campaign.

(APPLAUSE)


 John, what I have said, and I've said repeatedly, is I want to be as careful getting out as we were careless getting in, but I want to make sure that we get all our combat troops out as quickly as we can safely. Now, the estimates are maybe that's two brigades per month. At that pace it would be some time in 2009 that we had our combat troops out, depending on whether Bush follows through on his commitment to draw down from the surge.

We don't know that yet, but understand what's at stake here. John is exactly
right that the question is, how do we create a stable Iraqi government where
our troops are not required to remain permanent bases in -- and a permanent
occupation in Iraq?

We are spending $9 billion to $10 billion every month. That's money that could
be going right here in South Carolina to lay broadband lines in rural
communities, to put kids back to school.

And so when John McCain says we'll be there for 50 or 60 or 100 years, it is
not just the loss of life, which is obviously the most tragic aspect of it,
it's also the fact that financially it is unsustainable. We will have spent $2
trillion at least, it's estimated, by the time this whole thing is over.
That's enough to have rebuilt every road, bridge, hospital, school in America,
and still have money left over.

(APPLAUSE)


 But just one last point I want to make.

We are seeing Al Qaida stronger now than at any time since 2001. That is a
significant threat that has to be dealt with. Because we have been distracted,
we have ended up seeing a more dangerous situation, and so we are not -- this
is not just a matter of who is right and who is wrong about having gone to war
or the surge. It's also, how do we deal with the future threats? And as long
as we're bogged down in Iraq, we are not going to be able to deal with those
future threats.


 Well, first of all, Charlie's absolutely right that African-Americans should vote for what's best for them, their children, and this country, and the same way that I think Hillary...

(APPLAUSE)

... you know, Hillary feels that women should vote for what's best for them,
their children, and their country.


 And the same way that John...


 Absolutely. Same way that John, I think, he wants white males to vote for...

(LAUGHTER)


 So I think Charlie's right in principle. Now, obviously, he and I differ in terms of what would be best for the nation. I wouldn't be running if I didn't think that I could bring the country together most effectively, that I can overcome the special interests in Washington most effectively, that I can inspire the American people to get involved in their government most effectively.

So his principle is right. He just has miscalculated in his equation. But I
get along great with Charlie, so I'm sure that - as president, I look forward
to working with him as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee to get
things done for families of America.

(APPLAUSE)


 Well, I think John has run a terrific campaign and has focused on poverty during the campaign.

But, John, I have to say, first of all, I have put forward a comprehensive
poverty plan that talks about early childhood education, health care for
children, dealing with ex-offenders.

And I'll be, you know, happy to share it with you. I know that you don't have
time to read all my stuff, just as I don't have time to read yours.

But understand this. I haven't just been talking about...


 Well, there you go.

(LAUGHTER)

That's when I usually read my stuff, actually. But I think it's important.

It's not just talking about it during a campaign. You know, as I said, I
started my career after college working in low-income neighborhoods, working
in public housing projects, talking to children who would tell me that, when I
asked them, "What do you want to be when you grow up?" They say, "I want to be
a doctor," or, "I want to be a lawyer," had the same aspirations as every
other child, but they were three, four grade levels behind.

And nobody had told them that the likelihood of them accomplishing their goals
were each year diminished because we weren't putting the money in to make sure
that they could actually achieve it.

And that's what I did as a civil rights attorney. That's what I did as a state
legislator, providing health care for people who didn't have it, making sure
that we are providing tax relief to those who need it, as opposed to those who
don't.

So I want to make clear, John, that I think a lifetime commitment is how
people are going to have to measure these issues.

One last point I want to make, because I think the media, you know, has really
been focused a lot on race as we move down to South Carolina. And I have to
say that, as I travel around South Carolina, I am absolutely convinced that
white, black, Latino, Asian, people want to move beyond our divisions, and
they want to join together...

(APPLAUSE)

... in order to create a movement for change in this country.

And, I mean, I'm not entirely faulting the media because, look, race is a
factor in our society. There's no doubt that in a race where you've got an
African-American, and a woman, and John...

(LAUGHTER)

... there's no doubt that that has piqued interest, but I guess what I'm
saying is I don't want to sell the American people short.

They are desperate to move beyond the same, old arguments that we've been
having and start actually getting something done in this country. And that's
what the Democratic Party has been about.

(APPLAUSE)

The Republicans may have a different attitude, because they haven't been
appearing before forums that are diverse. And the policies, frankly, that
they've promoted -- and here I think all three of us agree -- the policies
that they have promoted have not been good at providing ladders for upward
mobility and opportunity for all people.

That is a fight that all of us will fight. But I don't want us to get drawn
into this notion that somehow this is going to be a race that splits along
racial lines.


 Here we go.


 Well, I think Bill Clinton did have an enormous affinity with the African-American community, and still does. And I think that's well earned.

Like John, one of the things that I'm always inspired by -- no, I'm -- this
I'm serious about. I'm always inspired by young men and women who grew up in
the South when segregation was still taking place, when, you know, the
transformations that are still incomplete but at least had begun had not yet
begun. And to see that transformation in their own lives I think that is
powerful, and it is hopeful, because what it indicates is that people can
change.

And each successive generation can, you know, create a different vision of
how, you know, we have to treat each other. And I think Bill Clinton embodies
that. I think he deserves credit for that.

Now, I haven't...

(APPLAUSE)


 I have to say that, you know, I would have to, you know, investigate more of Bill's dancing abilities.

(LAUGHTER)


 You know, and some of this other stuff before I accurately judge whether he was in fact a brother. But...

(APPLAUSE)


 And I have to say, Wolf, that I especially appreciate the fact that Hillary and John were giving me a tough time, because that shows I'm doing pretty good.

(APPLAUSE)

I would be upset if there was too much civility in this debate, because it is
competitive.

One last point I want to make about this, though, and John alluded to it on
the poverty issue.

The one thing we -- when I say we should not focus on my race or Hillary's
gender in terms of choosing a candidate, that is not to say that we should be
ignoring the very real problems that still exist in terms of race in America.

(APPLAUSE)

So for example, if we know that in our criminal justice system, African-
Americans and whites, for the same crime, receive - are arrested at very
different rates, are convicted at very different rates, receive very different
sentences.

(APPLAUSE)

That is something that we have to talk about. But that's a substantive issue
and it has to do with how do we pursue racial justice.

If I am president, I will have a civil rights division that is working with
local law enforcement so that they are enforcing laws fairly and justly. But I
would expect...

(APPLAUSE)

... a white president or a woman president should want to do the same thing,
because I believe that the pursuit of racial equality, of the perfection of
this union, is not just a particular special interest issue of the African-
American community. That is how all of us are going to move forward.

And to the extent that we don't deal with those issues, those longstanding,
deep seeded issues, we will continue to be hampered. We will be competing with
the world with one hand tied behind our backs.


 Well, Hillary's right. All of us have extraordinarily smart and effective advocates in our spouses. 

And, as I've said before, I do not at all begrudge -- I would expect that Bill
Clinton would campaign vigorously on your behalf. Obviously, he's the ex-
president, so that means that the gets a lot of outsized attention and there's
nothing long with that. That's, as you said, an asset to the campaign. I have
been troubled, and we already had this discussion, so I don't want to go over
it again, the degree to which my record is not accurately portrayed. But
that's standard practice in some of our political battles. What I do want to
focus on, though, is how important it is, when you talked about taking on the
Republicans, how important it is I think to redraw the political map in this
country. And the reason I say that is that we have gone through the 2000
election, the 2004 election, both of which were disappointing elections. But
the truth is that we as Democrats have not had a working majority in a very
long time. And what I mean by that is a working majority that could push
through the kinds of bold initiatives that all of us have proposed. And one of
the reasons that I am running for president is because I believe that I can
inspire new people to get involved in the process, that I can reach out to
independents and, yes, some Republicans who have also lost trust in their
government and want to see something new. When you look at Bush and Cheney and
their record, the one good thing they've done for us is they have given their
party a very bad name. (APPLAUSE) That gives us a unique opportunity in this
election, and what we can't do, I think, is just to take the playing field as
a given. We want to expand the scope of the electorate so that we can start
getting a 60 percent majority, more folks in the House, more folks in the
Senate, and I think that's something I can do.


 And that's why we've seen record turnout in every election so far. I'm not taking all the credit for it. I think people are voting against George Bush. But I also think that we've inspired people who had not previously voted before, and that's what the Democratic Party has to do. 


 You're feeling all defensive about it, John. It's all right, man. 


 ... where in northern Nevada, in places like Elko, I won by 30 points. And we were attracting Independents and some Republicans. You know, this is the same way that I was able to win the election in Illinois, going to downstate Illinois. So, I think it's important for us not to assume that we can't reach out to people of all -- of all persuasions, and I want to just take one last example on this, and that is on the issue of faith. 


 You know, I am a proud Christian. And the... 

(APPLAUSE) I think there have been times -- there have been times where our
Democratic Party did not reach out as aggressively as we could to
evangelicals, for example, because the assumption was, well, they don't agree
with us on choice, or they don't agree with us on gay rights, and so we just
shouldn't show up. And when you don't show up, if you're not going to church,
then you're not talking to church folk. And that means that people have a very
right-wing perspective in terms of what faith means and of defining our faith.


 And as somebody who believes deeply in the precepts of Jesus Christ, particularly treating the least of these in a way that he would, that it is important for us to not concede that ground. Because I think we can go after those folks and get them. (APPLAUSE) 


 Let me interject. 


 Let me just interject on this. Hillary, you're right. Nobody's hands are perfectly clean in politics. That is true. I mean, there a distinction, though, between not taking PAC and federal lobbyist money and having that as a major way of driving your campaign and having some ancillary involvement. But, you know, I don't want to go down that route. What I want to really focus on is this issue of national security, because I think you've repeated this a number of times. You are the person best prepared on national security issues on day one, and so if you're running against John McCain, that you can go toe-to-toe. I fundamentally disagree with that. And I want to tell you why, because I believe that the way we are going to take on somebody like a John McCain on national security is not that we're sort of -- we've been sort of like John McCain, but not completely, you know, we voted for the war, but we had reservations. I think it's going to be somebody who can serve a strong contrast and say, "We've got to overcome the politics of fear in this country." As commander-in-chief... (APPLAUSE) As commander-in-chief, all of us would have a responsibility to keep the American people safe. That's our first responsibility. And I would not hesitate to strike against anybody who would do Americans or American interests' harm. But what I do believe... 


 Wait, Wolf, let me finish. I was listening to these folks quite some time. What I do believe is that we have to describe a new foreign policy that says, for example, I will meet not just with our friends, but with our enemies, because I remember what John F. Kennedy said, that we should never negotiate out of fear, but we should never fear to negotiate. Having that kind of posture is the way I think we effectively debate the Republicans on this issue. Because if we just play into the same fear-mongering that they have been engaged in since 9/11, then we are playing on their battlefield, but, more importantly, we are not doing what's right in order to rebuild our alliances, repair our relationships around the world, and actually make us more safe in the long term. 


 Well, I don't think Dr. King would endorse any of us. I think what he would call upon the American people to do is to hold us accountable, and this goes to the core differences, I think, in this campaign. I believe change does not happen from the top down. It happens from the bottom up. Dr. King understood that. (APPLAUSE) It was those women who were willing to walk instead of ride the bus, union workers who are willing to take on violence and intimidation to get the right to organize. It was women who decided, "I'm as smart as my husband. I'd better get the right to vote." 


 them arguing, mobilizing, agitating, and ultimately forcing elected officials to be accountable, I think that's the key. 

So that has been a hallmark of my career, transparency and accountability,
getting the American people involved. That's how we're going to bring about
change. That's why I want to be president of the United States, to respect the
power of the American people to bring about change.

(APPLAUSE)


 (Cheers, applause.) Well, thank you, Wolf. Thank you. Thank you. 

First of all -- first of all, I want to acknowledge a candidate who left the
race this week, John Edwards, who did such an outstanding job -- (applause) --
elevating the issues of poverty and the plight of working families all across
the country, and we wish him and Elizabeth well. He's going to be a voice for
this party and for this country for many years to come.

I also want to note something that you noted at the beginning, which is that
when we started off, we had eight candidates on this stage. We now are down to
two, after 17 debates. And, you know, it is a testimony to the Democratic
Party and it is a testimony to this country that we have the opportunity to
make history, because I think one of us two will end up being the next
president of the United States of America. (Cheers, applause.)

I also want to note that I was friends with Hillary Clinton before we started
this campaign. I will be friends with Hillary Clinton after this campaign is
over. (Applause.) She has done -- she's run a -- we're running a competitive
race, but it's because we both love this country, and we believe deeply in the
issues that are at stake.

I believe we're at a defining moment in our history. Our nation is at war. Our
planet is in peril. Families all across the country are struggling with
everything from back-breaking health care costs to trying to stay in their
homes. And at this moment, the question is, how do we take the country in a
new direction? How do we get past the divisions that have prevented us from
solving these problems year after year after year?

I don't think the choice is between black and white, or it's about gender or
religion. I don't think it's about young or old. I think what is at stake
right now is whether we are looking backwards or we were looking forwards. I
think it is the past versus the future. (Applause.)


 And -- just to finish up, Wolf -- the -- and I think that as we move forward in this debate, understand we are both Democrats, and we understand the issues at stake. 

We want change from George Bush but we also have to have change that brings
the country together, pushes back against the special interests in Washington
and levels with the American people about the difficult changes that we make.
If we do that, I am confident that we can solve any problem, and we can
fulfill the destiny that America wants to see, not just next year but in the
many years to come. (Cheers, applause.)


 Well, I actually think that a couple of the ones that Hillary mentioned are genuine policy differences. They're worthy of debate. 

Let's take health care. About 95 percent of our plans are similar. We both set
up a government plan that would allow people who otherwise don't have health
insurance, because of a pre-existing condition, like my mother had, or at
least what the insurance said was a pre-existing condition -- let them get
health insurance.

We both want to emphasize prevention because we've got to do something about
ever-escalating costs and we don't want children, who I meet all the time,
going to emergency rooms for treatable illnesses like asthma.

It is true we've got a policy difference because my view is that the reason
people don't have health care -- and I meet them all the time: in South
Carolina, a mother whose child has cerebral palsy and could not get insurance
for it and started crying during a town hall meeting. Hillary, I'm sure, has
had the same experiences. What they're struggling with is they can't afford
the health care. And so I emphasize reducing costs.

My belief is -- is that if we make it affordable, if we provide subsidies to
those who can't afford it, they will buy it. Senator Clinton has a different
approach. She believes that we have to force people who don't have health
insurance to buy it, otherwise there will be a lot of people who don't get it.

I don't see those folks.

And I think that it is important for us to recognize that if, in fact, you're
going to mandate the purchase of insurance and it's not affordable, then
there's going to have to be some enforcement mechanism that the government
uses. And they may charge people who already don't have health care fines or
have to take it out of their paychecks. And that I don't think is helping
those without health insurance. That is a genuine difference. (Applause.)

On the mortgage crisis -- on the mortgage crisis, again we both believe that
this is a critical problem. It's a huge problem in California and all across
the country. And we agree that we have to keep people in their homes.

So I've put forward a $10 billion home foreclosure prevention fund that would
help to bridge the lender and the borrower so that people can stay in their
homes.

I have not signed on to the notion of an interest rates freeze, and the reason
is not because we need to protect the banks; the problem is, is that if we
have such a freeze, mortgage interest rates will go up across the board and
you will have a lot of people who are currently trying to get mortgages who
will actually have more of a difficult time. So, some of the people that we
want to protect could end up being hurt by such a plan. (Scattered applause.)

Now, keep in mind the one thing I suspect that Senator Clinton and I agree on.
Part of the reason we're in this mortgage mess is because there's been
complete lack of oversight on the part of the Bush administration. (Applause.)
The mortgage lending industry spent $185 billion -- 105 -- 80 -- $185 million
lobbying to prevent provisions that go against predatory lending, for example,
that I introduced.

Which brings me to another difference. I believe that it is very important for
us to reduce the influence of lobbyists and special interests in Washington.
(Cheers, applause.) I think that a lot of the issues that both Senator Clinton
and I care about will not move forward unless we have increased the kinds of
ethics proposals that I passed just last year, some of the toughest since
Watergate. That's something that John Edwards and I both talked about
repeatedly in this campaign. That's why I don't take federal PAC and federal
lobbyist money. That is a difference.

And the last point I'll make is on Iraq. Senator Clinton brought this up. I
was opposed to Iraq from the start. (Cheers, applause.) And that -- and I say
that not just to look backwards but also to look forwards, because I think
what the next president has to show is the kind of judgment that will ensure
that we are using our military power wisely.

It is true that I want to elevate diplomacy, so that it is part of our arsenal
to serve the American people's interests and to keep us safe.

And I have disagreed with Senator Clinton on, for example, meeting with Iran.
I think -- and the National Intelligence Estimate, the last report suggested
that if we are meeting with them, talking to them, and offering them both
carrots and sticks, they are more likely to change their behavior, and we can
do so in a way that does not ultimately cost billions of dollars, thousands of
lives, and hurt our reputation around the world. (Applause.)


 Understand who we're talking about here. Every expert who looks at it says anybody who wants health care will be able to get health care under my plan. There won't be anybody out there who wants health care who will not be able to get it. That's point number one. So the estimate is -- this is where the 15 million figure comes in -- is that there are 15 million people who don't want health care. That's the argument. 

Now, first of all, I dispute that there are 15 million people out there who
don't want it. I believe that there are people who can't afford it and if we
provide them enough subsidies, they will purchase it, number one. Number two:
I mandate coverage for all children. (Applause.) Number three: I say that
young people, who are the most likely to be healthy but think they're
invulnerable and decide, I don't need health care, what I'm saying is that
insurance companies and my plan as well will allow people up to 25 years old
to be covered under their parents' plan.

So as a consequence, I don't believe that there will be 15 million out there.

Now, under any mandate, you're going to have problems with people who don't
end up having health coverage. Massachusetts right now embarked on an
experiment where they mandated coverage. And by the way, I want to
congratulate Governor Schwarzenegger and the speaker and others who have been
trying to do this in California, but I know that those who have looked at it
understand. You can mandate it, but there are still going to be people who
can't afford it. And if they cannot afford it, then the question is, what are
you going to do about it? Are you going to fine them? Are you going to garnish
their wages?

Those are questions that Senator Clinton has not answered with respect to her
plan, but I think we can anticipate that there would also be people
potentially who are not covered and are actually hurt if they have a mandate
imposed on them.


 If people are gaming the system, there are ways that we can address that, by for example making them pay some of the back premiums for not having gotten it in the first place. 

But understand that number one, Hillary says that she's got enough subsidies.

Well, we've priced out both our plan and Senator Clinton's plan, and some of
the subsidies are not going to be sufficient, point number one.

Point number two is that I am actually not interested in just capping
premiums. I want to lower premiums by about an average of $2,500 per family,
per year, because people right now cannot afford it. I can't tell you how many
folks I meet who have premiums that are so high that essentially they don't
have health insurance. They have house insurance. (Scattered applause.)

What they do is they have a $10,000 deductible or what have you to try to
reduce costs. They never go to a doctor. And that ended up something that we
paid for. So I'm trying to reduce premiums for all families.

But the last point I want to make has to do with how we're going to actually
get this plan done. You know, Ted Kennedy said that he is confident that we
will get universal health care with me as president, and he's been working on
it longer than I think about -- than anybody. But he's gone through 12 of
these plans, and each time they have failed.

And part of the reason I think that they have failed is we have not been able
to bring Democrats, Republicans together to get it done.

That's what I did in Illinois -- (applause) -- to provide insurance for people
who did not have it. That's what I will do in bringing all parties together,
not negotiating behind closed doors but bringing all parties together, and
broadcasting those negotiations on C-SPAN so that the American people can see
what the choices are, because part of what we have to do is enlist --
(applause) -- the American people in this process, and overcoming the special
interests and the lobbyists who are -- Senator Clinton is right; they will
resist anything that we try to do.

My plan, her plan, they will try to resist. And the antidote to that is making
sure that the American people understand what is at stake. I'm absolutely
committed to making sure that anybody in America who needs health care is
going to get it.


 No, it's not a swipe. This is something that I've been talking about consistently. What I want to do is increase transparency and accountability to offset the power of the special interests and the lobbyists. (Applause.) If a drug company -- if the drug companies or a member of Congress who's carrying water for the drug companies wants to argue that we should not negotiate for the cheapest available price on drugs, then I want them to make that argument in front of the American people. 

And I will have experts who explain that, in fact, it is legitimate for drug
companies to make profits, but they are making outsized profits on the backs
of senior citizens who need those prescription drugs. And that is an argument
that the American people have to be involved with. Otherwise we're not going
to get any plan through. (Applause.)


 Well, first of all, I don't think the Republicans are going to be in a real strong position to argue fiscal responsibility when they've added 4 (trillion dollars) or $5 trillion worth of national debt. (Cheers, applause.) 

You know, I am happy to have that argument.

If John McCain, for example, is the nominee, I respect that John McCain in the
first two rounds of Bush tax cuts said it is irresponsible; that we have never
before cut taxes at the same time as we are going into war. And somewhere
along the line the Straight Talk Express lost some wheels -- (laughter) -- and
now he is in favor of extending Bush tax cuts that went to some of the
wealthiest Americans, who don't need them and were not even asking for them.

So I've already said a sizable portion of my health care plan will be paid for
because we emphasize savings. We invest in prevention. So that, you know, as I
said before, the chronically ill, that account for 20 ppercent -- or the 20
percent of chronically ill patients that account for 80 percent of the cost --
that they're getting better treatment. We are actually paying for a dietician
for people to lose weight, as opposed to paying for the $30,000 foot
amputation. That will save us money.

We can conservatively save 100 (billion dollars) to $150 billion a year under
my plan. That pays for part of it. Part of it is paid for by rolling back the
Bush tax cuts on the top 1 percent.

(Applause.)

Now, so my plan is paid for. But one thing that I think we're going to have to
do as Democrats when we go after the Republicans is, the question is not tax
cuts, tax hikes. The question is, who are the tax cuts for? Who are the tax
hikes imposed upon?

What we have had right now is a situation where we cut taxes for people who
don't need them. Warren Buffett has said, you know, I made $46 million last
year. That was a bad year for me, but I can still afford to pay more than my
secretary, who has a higher tax rate than I do. That is not fair, and I want
to change that.

We've got a trillion dollars worth of corporate tax loopholes and tax havens,
and I've said I will close those. And I will give tax cuts to people making
$75,000 a year or less by offsetting their payroll tax. Senior citizens making
less than $50,000 a year -- we want to eliminate taxes for them.

So the question is, can we restore a sense of balance to our economy and make
sure that those of us who are blessed and fortunate, and have thrived in this
economy, in this global economy, that we can afford to pay a little bit more,
so that that child in East Los Angeles, who is in a crumbling school with
teachers that are having to dig into their own pockets for school supplies,
that they are having a chance at the American dream as well? I'm happy to have
that argument. (Cheers, applause.)


 On -- on -- on -- on wealthy Americans. 


 And then look, I -- I -- I'm not -- 


 I'm not bashful about it. 


 I suspect a lot of this crowd. It looks like a pretty well-dressed crowd. (Laughter.) 


 You guys are -- potentially pay a little bit more. I will pay a little bit more. 

But as I said, you know, we have, I believe, a moral obligation to make sure
that everybody has the opportunity to get health care in this country.

And one last point I want to make. We will have to make some up- front costs.
That's why -- in either of our plans. You know, if we want to invest in
electronic medical records, then we've got to go to rural hospitals who might
not be able to afford it and say we're going to help you buy the computer
software and -- and the machinery to make sure that this works. But that
investment will pay huge dividends over the long term, and the place where it
will pay the biggest dividends is in Medicare and Medicaid because if we can
get a healthier population, that is the only way over the long term that we
can actually control that spending that is going to break the federal budget.
(Cheers, applause.)


 They were doing just fine. 


 Well, let me first of all say that I have worked on the streets of Chicago as an organizer, with people who've been laid off from steel plants -- black, white, Hispanic, Asian -- and all of them are feeling economically insecure right now, and they have been for many years. Before the latest round of immigrants showed up, you had huge unemployment rates among African-American youth. 

And so I think to suggest somehow that the problem that we're seeing, in inner
city unemployment for example, is attributable to immigrants, I think, is a
case of scapegoating that I do not believe in, I do not subscribe to. (Cheers,
applause.)

And this is where we do have a very real difference with the other party. I
believe that we can be a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.

Now, there is no doubt that we have to get control of our borders. We can't
have hundreds of thousands of people coming over to the United States without
us having any idea who they are. I also believe that we do have to crack down
on those employers that are taking advantage of the situation, hiring folks
who cannot complain about worker conditions, who aren't getting the minimum
wage sometimes or aren't getting overtime. We have to crack down on them. I
also believe we have to give a pathway to citizenship, after they have paid a
fine and learned English, to those who are already here. Because if we don't,
they will continue to undermine U.S. wages.

But let's understand more broadly that the economic problems that African
Americans are experiencing, whites are experiencing, blacks and Latinos are
experiencing in this country are all rooted in the fact that we have had an
economy out of balance. We've had tax cuts that went up instead of down. We
have had a lack of investment in basic infrastructure in this country. Our
education system is chronically underfunded.

(Applause.) And so there are a whole host of reasons why we have not been
generating the kinds of jobs that we are generating. We should not use
immigration as a -- as a tactic to divide. Instead we should pull the country
together to get this economy back on track. That's what I intend to do as
president of the United States of America.

(Applause.)


 Well, what I meant was that when this issue came up, not driver's license but comprehensive immigration reform generally, I worked with Ted Kennedy, I worked with Dick Durbin, I worked with John McCain -- although he may not admit it now -- (laughter) -- to move this issue forward aggressively. 

And it's a hard political issue, let's be honest. This is not an issue that
polls well. But I think it is the right thing to do. And I think we have to
show leadership on the issue. (Applause.)

And it is important for us, I believe, to recognize that the problems that
workers are experiencing generally are not primarily caused by immigration.


 (Inaudible.) 


 That is -- what I said was that we have to stand up for these issues when it's tough. And that's what I've done. I did it when I was in the state legislature, sponsoring the Illinois version of the DREAM Act, so that children who were brought here through no fault of their own are able to go to college, because we actually want well-educated kids -- (applause) -- in our country who are able to -- who are able to succeed and become part of this economy and part of the American dream. 


 Wolf, you keep on trying to -- trying to push on -- 


 There are those who were opposed to this issue and there have been those who have flipped on the issue and have run away from the issue. 

This wasn't directed particularly at Senator Clinton, but the fact of the
matter is, I have stood up consistently on this issue.

On the driver's license issue, I don't actually want -- I don't believe that
we're going to have to deal with this if we have comprehensive immigration
reform because, as I said before, people don't come here to drive, they come
here to work. (Applause.) And if we have signed them up -- if they have -- if
we have registered them, if they have paid a fine, if they are learning
English, if they are going to the back of the line, if we fix our legal
immigration system, then I believe we will not have this problem of
undocumented workers in this country because people will be able to actually
go on pathway to citizenship. That, I think, is the right approach for
African- Americans, I think it's the right approach for Latinos, I think it's
the right approach for white workers here in the United States as well.
(Applause.)


 The only point I would make is, Senator Clinton gave a number of different answers over the course of six weeks on this issue, and that did appear political. 

Now, you know, at this point she's got a clear position, but it took a while.
(Applause.) And --


 I'm just being -- just in fairness, initially in a debate you said you were for it. Then you said you were against it. And the only reason I bring that up is to underscore the fact that this is a difficult political issue. 

From my perspective, I agree with Bill Richardson that there is a public
safety concern here and that we're better off -- because I don't want a bunch
of hit-and-run drivers because they're worried about being deported and so
they don't report an accident. That is a judgment call. (Scattered applause.)

But I do think it is important to recognize that this can be tough. And the
question is, who is going to tackle this problem and solve it? Many of the
solutions that Senator Clinton just talked about are solutions that I agree
with, that I've been working on for many years. And my suspicion is, whatever
our differences, we're going to have big differences with the Republicans. But
I think a practical, common-sense solution to the problem is what the American
people are looking for.


 I agree. 


 (Joined in progress from the source) -- Americans disagree -- (laughs, cheers, applause) -- and think that we need to move forward with new leadership. So I -- that's why we're having this contest. 

You know, I have spent my entire adult life trying to bring about change in
this country. I started off as a community organizer working on the streets of
Chicago, providing job training and -- and after-school programs and economic
development for neighborhoods that had been devastated by steel plants that
had closed. I worked as a civil rights attorney, turning down lucrative
corporate jobs to provide justice for those who'd been denied on the job or at
the ballot box. (Applause.) I worked as a state legislator for years,
providing health care to people who did not have it, reforming a death penalty
system that was broken -- (scattered applause) -- providing tax relief to
those who needed it. and in the United States Senate, I've worked on
everything from nuclear proliferation to issues of alternative energy. And in
each instance, what I have found is is that the leadership that's needed is
the ability to bring people together who otherwise don't see anything in
common; the ability to overcome the special interests -- and I passed both in
Washington and in Illinois comprehensive ethics reform that opened up
government so that the American people could be involved; and talking straight
to the American people about how we're going to solve these problems, and
putting in the hard work of negotiations to get stuff done.

So I respect Senator Clinton's record. I think it's a -- it's a terrific
record. But I also believe that the skills that I have are the ones that are
needed right now to move the country forward; otherwise, I wouldn't be running
for president of the United States of America. (Cheers, applause.)


 Let me just also point out that Mitt Romney hasn't gotten a very good return on his investment during this presidential campaign. (Laughter, applause.) So I'm happy to take a look at my management style during the course of this last year and his. 

I think they compare fairly well. (Laughter, cheers, applause.)


 Oh, I think there's no doubt that there were good things that happened during those eight years of the Clinton administration. I think that's undeniable. 

Look, we're all Democrats. And particularly when looked through the lens of
the last eight years with George Bush, they look even better. So I don't want
to diminish some of the accomplishments that occurred during those eight
years. And I absolutely agree with Senator Clinton that ultimately each of us
have to be judged on our own merits. All of us have endorsers, and ultimately
you've got to take a look and see, who do you want in that White House?

I do think that there was something that happened, and we've been seeing it
all across the country. We saw it at the event with Senator Kennedy. We are
bringing in a whole generation of new voters, which I think is exciting.
(Cheers, applause.)

And part of the task, I believe, of leadership is the hard nuts- and-bolts of
getting legislation passed and managing the bureaucracy. But part of it is
also being able to call on the American people to reach higher, to say we
shouldn't settle for an economy that does very well for some but leaves
millions of people behind.

We should not accept a school in South Carolina that was built in the 1800s
where kids are having to learn in trailers, and every time the railroad goes
by the tracks, the building shakes and the teacher has to stop teaching.

We should not accept a foreign policy that has seen our respect diminish
around the world and has not made us more safe. (Applause.)

So the question is -- part of the question is who can work the levers of power
more effectively. Part of the question is also who can inspire the American
people to get re-engaged in their government again, push back the special
interests, reduce the influence of lobbyists. And that is something that I
have worked on all my life and we are seeing in this campaign.

And one of the things I'm thrilled with is -- and this is good news for
Democrats -- every single election that we've had so far in this contest,
you've seen the number of people participating in the Democratic primary
double. (Applause.) Now, that's not all due to me. Senator Clinton is
attracting enthusiasm and support as well. But I can say, for example, in Iowa
about 60 percent of those new voters voted for me. And that, I think, changes
the electoral map in such a way where we're going to have more people ready to
move forward on the agendas that we all agree with. That's part of the
leadership I want to provide as president. (Applause.)


 Well, you know, I -- I think it is important for us to be as careful getting out as we were careless getting in. And -- (applause) -- so I have said very clearly I will end this war. We will not have a permanent occupation and we will not have permanent bases in Iraq. (Applause.) When John McCain suggests that we might be there a hundred years, that I think indicates a profound lack of understanding that we've got a whole host of global threats out there -- including Iraq, but we've got a -- a big problem right now in Afghanistan. Pakistan is a great concern. We are neglecting potentially our foreign policy with respect to Latin America. China is strengthening. And if we neglect our economy by spending $200 billion every year in this war that has not made us more safe -- (applause) -- that is undermining our long-term security. 

But I do think it is important for us to set a date. And the reason I think it
is important is because if we are going to send a signal to the Iraqis that we
are serious, and prompt the Shi'a, the Sunni and the Kurds to actually come
together and negotiate, they have to have clarity about how serious we are. It
can't be muddy. It can't be fuzzy. They've got to know that we are serious
about this process.

And I also think we've got to be very clear about what our mission is, and
there may be a difference here between Senator Clinton and myself in terms of
the force structures that we would leave behind. Both of us have said we would
make sure that our embassies and our civilians are protected. Both of us have
said that we've got to care for Iraqi civilians, including the 4 million who
have been displaced already. We already have a humanitarian crisis and we have
not taken those responsibilities seriously. We both have said that we need to
have a strike force that can take out potential terrorist bases that get set
up in Iraq.

But the one thing that I think is very important is that we not get mission
creep and we not start suggesting that we should have troops in Iraq to blunt
Iranian influence.

If we were concerned about Iranian influence, we should not have had this
government installed in the first place. (Applause.) We shouldn't have invaded
in the first place. It was part of the reason that I think it was such a
profound strategic error for us to go into this war in the first place --
(applause) -- and that's one of the reasons why I think I will be -- just to
-- to -- just to finish up this point, I think I will be the Democrat who will
be most effective in going up against a John McCain -- or any other
Republican, because they all want basically a continuation of George Bush's
policies -- because I will offer a clear contrast as somebody who never
supported this war, thought it was a bad idea. I don't want to just end the
war, but I want to end the mind-set that got us into war in the first place.
That's the kind of leadership I intend to provide as president of the United
States. (Cheers, applause.)


 I wouldn't call it a "swipe." I think -- 


 We are having a -- we're having -- 


 Yeah, absolutely. (Laughter, applause.) 


 Right. 


 I welcome the progress. This notion that Democrats don't want to see progress in Iraq is ridiculous. I have to hug mothers in rope lines during town hall meetings as they weep over their fallen sons and daughters. 

I want to get our troops home safely, and I want us as a country to have this
mission completed honorably. But the notion that somehow we have succeeded as
a consequence of the recent reductions in violence means that we have set the
bar so low it's buried in the sand at this point. (Cheers, applause.)

We -- and I said this before -- we went from intolerable levels of violence
and a dysfunctional government to spikes and horrific levels of violence and a
dysfunctional government, and now two years later we're back to intolerable
levels of violence and a dysfunctional government. And in the meantime, we
have spent billions of dollars, lost thousands of lives; thousands more have
been maimed and injured as a consequence and are going to have difficulty
putting their lives back together again.

So, understand that this has undermined our security. In the meantime,
Afghanistan has slid into more chaos than existed before we went into Iraq.

I am happy to have that argument. I also think it is going to be important,
though, for the Democrats -- you know, Senator Clinton mentioned the issue of
gravitas and judgment. I think it is much easier for us to have the argument
when we have a nominee who says, "I always thought this was a bad idea, this
was a bad strategy."

(Applause.)

It was not just a problem of execution -- it was not just a problem of
execution.

I mean, they screwed up the execution of it in all sorts of ways. And I think
even Senator McCain has acknowledged that.

The question is, can we make an argument that this was a conceptually flawed
mission from the start, and that we need better judgment when we decide to
send our young men and women into war, that we are making absolutely certain
that it is because there is a imminent threat, that American interests are
going to be protected, that we have a plan to succeed and to exit, that we are
going to train our troops properly and equip them properly and put them on
proper rotations and treat them properly when they come home?

And that is an argument that I think we are going to have a easier time making
if they can't turn around and say, but hold on a second; you supported this.
And that's part of the reason why I think that I would be the strongest
nominee on this argument of national security. (Cheers, applause.)


 I don't want to belabor this because I know we're running out of time, and I'm sure you guys want to move on to some other stuff. But I do have to just say this. 

The legislation, the authorization, had the title An Authorization to Use
Military Force, U.S. Military Force, in Iraq. I think everybody, the day after
that vote was taken, understood, this was a vote potentially to go to war.
(Applause.) I think people were very clear about that, if you look at the
headlines.

The reason that this is important again is that Senator Clinton, I think,
fairly has claimed that she's got the experience on day one. And part of the
argument that I'm making in this campaign is that it is important to be right
on day one -- (cheers, applause) -- and that the judgment that I've presented,
on this issue and some other issues, is relevant to how we're going to make
decisions in the future.

You know, it's not a function just of looking backwards. It's a function of
looking forwards, and how are we going to be able to make a series of
decisions in a very dangerous world? I mean, the terrorist threat is real. And
precisely because it's real, and we've got finite resources, we don't have the
capacity to just send our troops in anywhere we decide without good
intelligence, without a clear rationale. That's the kind of leadership that I
think we need from the next President of the United States. (Applause.)

That's what I intend to provide.


 (Joined in progress from the source) -- six-year-old daughter. So I look at this not just as a legislator or a presidential candidate, but as a parent. 

And as a parent, yes, I am concerned about what's coming over the airwaves.
Now, right now my daughters mostly are on Nickelodeon, but they know how to
work that remote. (Laughter.) And you know, the -- the primary responsibility
is for parents, and I -- and I reject the notion of censorship as an approach
to dealing with this problem. (Applause.)

I do think that it is important for us to make sure that we are giving parents
the tools that they need in order to monitor what their children is -- are --
are watching. And obviously the problem we have now is not just what's coming
over the Internet. And so for us to develop technologies and tools and invest
in those technologies and tools to make sure that we are, in fact, giving
parents power -- empowering parents I think is important.

The one other thing I will say is -- I don't mean to be insulting here, but --
but you know, I do think that it is important for those in the industry to
show some -- some thought about who they are marketing some of these programs
that are being produced to. (Applause.) And you know, I'm concerned about sex,
but I'm also concerned, you know -- some of the violent slasher/horror films
that come out, and you see a trailer, and I'm thinking, I don't want my six-
year-old or nine-year-old seeing that trailer while she's watching "American
Idol." And sometimes, you know, you see that kind of stuff coming up. I think
it is appropriate in a cooperative way to work with the industry to try to
deal with that problem, and I intend to work in that fashion when I'm
president of the United States of America. (Applause.)


 Thankfully Michelle is not on stage. I'm sure she could tell some stories as well. 


 Well, obviously there's a big difference between those two. (Laughter.) 


 But, look, let me say this, and I said this at the top. I respect Senator Clinton. I think her service to this country has been extraordinary. And I'm glad that we've been walking on this road together and that we're still on that road. 

We've got a lot more road to travel, and so I think it's premature for either
of us to start speculating about vice presidents, et cetera. I think it would
be premature and presumptuous.

I can say this about -- about who I want not just as vice president but as a
Cabinet member. Part of what I'd like to do is restore a sense of what is
possible in government. (Applause.) And that means having people of the -- of
the greatest excellence and competence. It means people with integrity. It
means people with independence, who are willing to say no to me -- (scattered
applause) -- so that, you know, no more yes-men or -women in the White House
-- (applause) -- and because I'm not going to be right on every single issue.

But you know, it is really important, I think, for us also to give the
American people this sense -- as they struggling with their mortgages and
struggling with their health care and trying to figure out how to get their
kids in a school that will teach them and prepare them and equip them for this
century, that they get a sense that government's on their side -- (applause)
-- that government is listening to them, that it's carrying their voices into
the White House.

And that's not what's happened over the last seven years. And whether it's my
Cabinet or it is the lowest federal civil servant out there, I want them to
understand they are working for the American people, to help the American
people achieve their dreams. That's the reason I'm running for president of
the United States of America. (Applause.)


 Well, you know, I'm sure that Hillary would be on anybody's short list. (Laughter.) So -- 


 What about my website? (Laughter.) 


 I'm teasing. (Laughter.) 


 Thanks. 


 Well, first of all, I take Senator Clinton at her word that she knew nothing about the photo. So I think that's something that we can set aside. 

I do want to focus on the issue of health care because Senator Clinton has
suggested that the flyer that we put out, the mailing that we put out, was
inaccurate. Now, keep in mind that I have consistently said that Senator
Clinton's got a good health care plan. I think I have a good health care plan.
I think mine is better, but I have said that 95 percent of our health care
plan is similar.

I have endured over the course of this campaign repeatedly negative mailing
from Senator Clinton in Iowa, in Nevada and other places suggesting that I
want to leave 15 million people out.

According to Senator Clinton, that is accurate. I dispute it, and I think it
is inaccurate. On the other hand, I don't fault Senator Clinton for wanting to
point out what she thinks is an advantage to her plan.

The reason she thinks that there are more people covered under her plan than
mine is because of a mandate. That is not a mandate for the government to
provide coverage to everybody; it is a mandate that every individual purchase
health care.

And the mailing that we put out accurately indicates that the main difference
between Senator Clinton's plan and mine is the fact that she would force in
some fashion individuals to purchase health care.

If it was not affordable, she would still presumably force them to have it,
unless there is a hardship exemption as they've done in Massachusetts, which
leaves 20 percent of the uninsured out. And if that's the case, then, in fact,
her claim that she covers everybody is not accurate.

Now, Senator Clinton has not indicated how she would enforce this mandate. She
hasn't indicated what level of subsidy she would provide to assure that it
was, in fact, affordable. And so it is entirely legitimate for us to point out
these differences.

But I think it's very important to understand the context of this, and that is
that Senator Clinton has -- her campaign, at least -- has constantly sent out
negative attacks on us, e-mail, robocalls, flyers, television ads, radio
calls.

And, you know, we haven't whined about it because I understand that's the
nature of these campaigns, but to suggest somehow that our mailing is somehow
different from the kinds of approaches that Senator Clinton has taken
throughout this campaign I think is simply not accurate.


 Well, look, I believe in universal health care, as does Senator Clinton. And this is -- this is, I think, the point of the debate, is that Senator Clinton repeatedly claims that I don't stand for universal health care. And, you know, for Senator Clinton to say that, I think, is simply not accurate. 

Every expert has said that anybody who wants health care under my plan will be
able to obtain it. President Clinton's own secretary of Labor has said that my
plan does more to reduce costs and as a consequence makes sure that the people
who need health care right now all across Ohio, all across Texas, Rhode
Island, Vermont, all across America, will be able to obtain it. And we do more
to reduce costs than any other plan that's been out there.

Now, I have no objection to Senator Clinton thinking that her approach is
superior, but the fact of the matter is, is that if, as we've heard tonight,
we still don't know how Senator Clinton intends to enforce a mandate, and if
we don't know the level of subsidies that she's going to provide, then you can
have a situation, which we are seeing right now in the state of Massachusetts,
where people are being fined for not having purchased health care but choose
to accept the fine because they still can't afford it, even with the
subsidies.

And they are then worse off. They then have no health care and are paying a
fine above and beyond that.


 That is a genuine difference between myself and Senator Clinton. 

And the last point I would make is, the insurance companies actually are happy
to have a mandate. The insurance companies don't mind making sure that
everybody has to purchase their product. That's not something they're
objecting to. The question is, are we going to make sure that it is affordable
for everybody? And that's my goal when I'm president of the United States.


 This is true. 


 No, there is a difference. 


 Well, let me -- 


 Brian, I'm sorry. 


 I'm going to get filibuttered -- I'm getting filibustered a little bit here. 


 I mean, it is just not accurate to say that Senator Clinton does more to control costs than mine. That is not the case. There are many experts who have concluded that she does not. 

I do provide a mandate for children, because, number one, we have created a
number of programs in which we can have greater assurance that those children
will be covered at an affordable price. On the -- on the point of many adults,
we don't want to put in a situation in which, on the front end, we are
mandating them, we are forcing them to purchase insurance, and if the
subsidies are inadequate, the burden is on them, and they will be penalized.
And that is what Senator Clinton's plan does.

Now, I am -- I am happy to have a discussion with Senator Clinton about how we
can both achieve the goal of universal health care. What I do not accept --
and which is what Senator Clinton has consistently done and in fact the same
experts she cites basically say there's no real difference between our plans,
that are -- that they are not substantial.

But it has to do with how we are going to achieve universal health care. That
is an area where I believe that if we make it affordable, people will purchase
it. In fact, Medicare Part B is not mandated, it is voluntary. And yet people
over 65 choose to purchase it, Hillary, and the reason they choose to purchase
it is because it's a good deal. And if people in Cleveland or anywhere in Ohio
end up seeing a plan that is affordable for them, I promise you they are
snatching it up because they are desperate to get health care. And that's what
I intend to provide as president of the United States.


 Which is why I cover them. 


 With respect -- 


 With respect -- 


 With respect -- 


 With respect to the young people, my plan specifically says that up until the age of 25 you will be able to be covered under your parents' insurance plan, so that cohort that 

Senator Clinton is talking about will, in fact, have coverage.


 Well, I think that it is inaccurate for Senator Clinton to say that she's always opposed NAFTA. In her campaign for Senate, she said that NAFTA, on balance, had been good for New York and good for America. I disagree with that. I think that it did not have the labor standards and environmental standards that were required in order to not just be good for Wall Street but also be good for Main Street. And if you travel through Youngstown and you travel through communities in my home state of Illinois, you will see entire cities that have been devastated as a consequence of trade agreements that were not adequately structured to make sure that U.S. workers had a fair deal. 

Now, I think that Senator Clinton has shifted positions on this and believes
that we should have strong environmental standards and labor standards, and I
think that's a good thing. But you know, when I first moved to Chicago in the
early '80s and I saw steelworkers who had been laid off of their plants --
black, white, and Hispanic -- and I worked on the streets of Chicago to try to
help them find jobs, I saw then that the net costs of many of these trade
agreements, if they're not properly structured, can be devastating.

And as president of the United States, I intend to make certain that every
agreement that we sign has the labor standards, the environmental standards
and the safety standards that are going to protect not just workers, but also
consumers. We can't have toys with lead paint in them that our children are
playing with. We can't have medicines that are actually making people more
sick instead of better because they're produced overseas. We have to stop
providing tax breaks for companies that are shipping jobs overseas and give
those tax breaks to companies that are investing here in the United States of
America.

And if we do those things, then I believe that we can actually get Ohio back
on the path of growth and jobs and prosperity. If we don't, then we're going
to continue to see the kind of deterioration that we've seen economically here
in this state.


 I will make sure that we renegotiate, in the same way that Senator Clinton talked about. And I think actually Senator Clinton's answer on this one is right. I think we should use the hammer of a potential opt-out as leverage to ensure that we actually get labor and environmental standards that are enforced. And that is not what has been happening so far. 

That is something that I have been consistent about. I have to say, Tim, with
respect to my position on this, when I ran for the United States Senate, the
Chicago Tribune, which was adamantly pro-NAFTA, noted that, in their
endorsement of me, they were endorsing me despite my strong opposition to
NAFTA.

And that conversation that I had with the Farm Bureau, I was not ambivalent at
all. What I said was that NAFTA and other trade deals can be beneficial to the
United States because I believe every U.S. worker is as productive as any
worker around the world, and we can compete with anybody. And we can't shy
away from globalization. We can't draw a moat around us. But what I did say,
in that same quote, if you look at it, was that the problem is we've been
negotiating just looking at corporate profits and what's good for
multinationals, and we haven't been looking at what's good for communities
here in Ohio, in my home state of Illinois, and across the country.

And as president, what I want to be is an advocate on behalf of workers. Look,
you know, when I go to these plants, I meet people who are proud of their
jobs. They are proud of the products that they've created. They have built
brands and profits for their companies. And when they see jobs shipped
overseas and suddenly they are left not just without a job, but without health
care, without a pension, and are having to look for seven-buck-an-hour jobs at
the local fast-food joint, that is devastating on them, but it's also
devastating on the community. That's not the way that we're going to prosper
as we move forward.


 I'm positive it hasn't been better for Ohio. But you are making a very legitimate point, which is, is that this trade (can/can't ?) be the only part of our economic agenda. But we've seen seven years in which we have a president who has been looking out for the well-heeled and people who are doing very well in the global economy, in the financial industries, in the telecommunications industries, and has not been looking out for ordinary workers. 

What do we have to do? We're going to have to invest in infrastructure to make
sure that we're competitive. And I've got a plan to do that. We're going to
have to invest in science and technology. We've got to vastly improve our
education system. We have to look at energy and the potential for creating
green jobs that can not just save on our energy costs but, more importantly,
can create jobs in building windmills that will produce manufacturing jobs
here in Ohio, can put rural communities back on their feet by working on
alternative fuels, making buildings more energy efficient.

We can hire young people who are out of work and put them to work in the
trade. So there are all sorts of things that we're going to have to do to make
the United States economy much more competitive, and those are plans that I
have put forward in this campaign and I expect to pursue as president of the
United States of America.


 Well, Senator Clinton I think equates experience with longevity in Washington. I don't think the American people do and I don't think that if you look at the judgments that we've made over the last several years that that's the accurate measure. On the most important foreign policy decision that we face in a generation -- whether or not to go into Iraq -- I was very clear as to why we should not -- that it would fan the flames of anti-American sentiment -- that it would distract us from Afghanistan -- that it would cost us billions of dollars, thousands of lives, and would not make us more safe, and I do not believe it has made us more safe. 

Al Qaeda is stronger than anytime since 2001 according to our own intelligence
estimates, and we are bogged down in a war that John McCain now suggests might
go on for another 100 years, spending $12 billion a month that could be
invested in the kinds of programs that both Senator Clinton and I are talking
about. So on Pakistan, during the summer I suggested that not only do we have
to take a new approach towards Musharraf but we have to get much more serious
about hunting down terrorists that are currently in northwestern Pakistan.

And many people said at the time well, you can't target those terrorists
because Musharraf is our ally and we don't want to offend him. In fact, what
we had was neither stability in Pakistan nor democracy in Pakistan, and had we
pursued a policy that was looking at democratic reforms in Pakistan we would
be much further along now than we are. So on the critical issues that actually
matter I believe that my judgment has been sound and it has been judgment that
I think has been superior to Senator Clinton's as well as Senator McCain's.


 Let me just follow up. My objections to the war in Iraq were simply -- not simply a speech. I was in the midst of a U.S. Senate campaign. It was a high-stakes campaign. I was one of the most vocal opponents of the war, and I was very specific as to why. 

And so when I bring this up, it is not simply to say "I told you so," but it
is to give you an insight in terms of how I would make decisions.

And the fact was, this was a big strategic blunder. It was not a matter of,
well, here is the initial decision, but since then we've voted the same way.
Once we had driven the bus into the ditch, there were only so many ways we
could get out. The question is, who's making the decision initially to drive
the bus into the ditch? And the fact is that Senator Clinton often says that
she is ready on day one, but in fact she was ready to give in to George Bush
on day one on this critical issue. So the same person that she criticizes for
having terrible judgment, and we can't afford to have another one of those, in
fact she facilitated and enabled this individual to make a decision that has
been strategically damaging to the United States of America.

With respect to Pakistan, I never said I would bomb Pakistan. What I said was
that if we have actionable intelligence against bin Laden or other key al
Qaeda officials, and we -- and Pakistan is unwilling or unable to strike
against them, we should. And just several days ago, in fact, this
administration did exactly that and took out the third-ranking al Qaeda
official.

That is the position that we should have taken in the first place. And
President Musharraf is now indicating that he would generally be more
cooperative in some of these efforts, we don't know how the new legislature in
Pakistan will respond, but the fact is it was the right strategy.

And so my claim is not simply based on a speech. It is based on the judgments
that I've displayed during the course of my service on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, while I've been in the United States Senate, and as
somebody who, during the course of this campaign, I think has put forward a
plan that will provide a clean break against Bush and Cheney. And that is how
we're going to be able to debate John McCain. Having a debate with John McCain
where your positions were essentially similar until you started running for
president, I think, does not put you in a strong position.

Tim Russert.


 Well, if the Iraqi government says that we should be there, then we cannot be there. This is a sovereign government, as George Bush continually reminds us. 

Now, I think that we can be in a partnership with Iraq to ensure the stability
and the safety of the region, to ensure the safety of Iraqis and to meet our
national security interests.

But in order to do that, we have to send a clear signal to the Iraqi
government that we are not going to be there permanently, which is why I have
said that as soon as I take office, I will call in the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
we will initiate a phased withdrawal, we will be as careful getting out as we
were careless getting in. We will give ample time for them to stand up, to
negotiate the kinds of agreements that will arrive at the political
accommodations that are needed. We will provide them continued support. But it
is important for us not to be held hostage by the Iraqi government in a policy
that has not made us more safe, that's distracting us from Afghanistan, and is
costing us dearly, not only and most importantly in the lost lives of our
troops, but also the amount of money that we are spending that is
unsustainable and will prevent us from engaging in the kinds of investments in
America that will make us more competitive and more safe.


 Well, first of all, I became chairman of this committee at the beginning of this campaign, at the beginning of 2007. So it is true that we haven't had oversight hearings on Afghanistan. 

I have been very clear in talking to the American people about what I would do
with respect to Afghanistan.

I think we have to have more troops there to bolster the NATO effort. I think
we have to show that we are not maintaining permanent bases in Iraq because
Secretary Gates, our current Defense secretary, indicated that we are getting
resistance from our allies to put more troops into Afghanistan because they
continue to believe that we made a blunder in Iraq and I think even this
administration acknowledges now that they are hampered now in doing what we
need to do in Afghanistan in part because of what's happened in Iraq.

Now, I always reserve the right for the president -- as commander in chief, I
will always reserve the right to make sure that we are looking out for
American interests. And if al Qaeda is forming a base in Iraq, then we will
have to act in a way that secures the American homeland and our interests
abroad. So that is true, I think, not just in Iraq, but that's true in other
places. That's part of my argument with respect to Pakistan.

I think we should always cooperate with our allies and sovereign nations in
making sure that we are rooting out terrorist organizations, but if they are
planning attacks on Americans, like what happened in 9/11, it is my job -- it
will be my job as president to make sure that we are hunting them down.


 Sounds good! (Laughter.) 


 (Chuckles.) 


 Well, I thought Senator Clinton showed some good humor there. I would give her points for delivery. 


 Look, I understand the broader point that Senator Clinton's been trying to make over the last several weeks. You know, she characterizes it typically as speeches, not solutions, or talk versus action. And as I said in the last debate, I've spent 20 years devoted to working on behalf of families who are having a tough time and they're seeking out the American dream. That's how I started my career in public service, that's how I brought Democrats and Republicans together to provide health care to people who needed it, that's how I helped to reform a welfare system that wasn't working in Illinois, that's how I've provided tax breaks to people who really needed them as opposed to just the wealthy, and so I'm very proud of that track record. 

And if Senator Clinton thinks that it's all talk, you know, you got to tell
that to the wounded warriors at Walter Reed who had to pay for their food and
pay for their phone calls before I got to the Senate. And I changed that law.
Or talk to those folks who I think have recognized that special interests are
dominating Washington and pushing aside the agenda of ordinary families here
in Ohio.

And so when I pass an ethics reform bill that makes sure that lobbyists can't
get gifts or meals or provide corporate jets to members of Congress and they
have to disclose who they're getting money from and who they're bundling it
for, that moves us in the direction of making sure that we have a government
that is more responsive to families.

Just one point I'll make, I was in Cincinnati, met with four women at a table
like this one. And these were middle-aged women who, as one woman put it, had
done everything right and never expected to find themselves in the situation
where they don't have health care. One of them doesn't have a job. One of them
is looking after an aging parent. Two of them were looking after disabled
children. One of them was dipping into their retirement accounts because she
had been put on disability on the job. And you hear these stories and what you
realize is nobody has been listening to them. That is not who George Bush or
Dick Cheney has been advocating for over the last seven years.

And so I am not interested in talk. I am not interested in speeches. I would
not be running if I wasn't absolutely convinced that I can put an economic
agenda forward that is going to provide them with health care, is going to
make college more affordable, and is going to get them the kinds of help that
they need not to solve all their problems, but at least to be able to achieve
the American dream.


 But I'm going to have an opportunity to respond to this. 


 (From videotape.) -- herself as co-president during the Clinton years. Every good thing that happened she says she was a part of. And so the notion that you can selectively pick what you take credit for and then run away from what isn't politically convenient, that doesn't make sense. 


 Well, I think what is absolutely true is, is that when Senator Clinton continually talks about her experience, she is including the eight years that she served as first lady, and you know, often says, you know, "Here's what I did." 

"Here's what we did." "Here's what we accomplished" -- which is fine.

And I have not -- I have not in any way said that that experience is not
relevant, and I don't begrudge her claiming that as experience. What I've
said, and what I would continue to maintain, is you can't take credit for all
the good things that happened but then, when it comes to issues like NAFTA,
you say, well, I -- behind the scenes, I was disagreeing. That doesn't work.
So you have to, I think, take both responsibility as well as credit.

Now there are several points that I think Senator Clinton made that I -- we
need to discuss here. First of all, she talked about me objecting to caps on
credit cards. Keep in mind, I objected to the entire bill -- a bill that
Senator Clinton, in its previous version, in 2001 had voted for. And in one of
the debates with you guys said, well, I voted for it, but I hoped it wouldn't
pass -- which, as a general rule, doesn't work. If you don't want it to pass,
you vote against it. (Laughter.)

You know, she mentioned that she is a fighter on health care. And look -- I do
not in any way doubt that Senator Clinton genuinely wants to provide health
care to all Americans.

What I have said is that the way she approached it back in '93, I think, was
wrong in part because she had the view that what's required is simply to
fight. And Senator Clinton ended up fighting not just the insurance companies
and the drug companies, but also members of her own party. And as a
consequence, there were a number of people, like Jim Cooper of Tennessee and
Bill Bradley and Pat Moynihan, who were not included in the negotiations. And
we had the potential of bringing people together to actually get something
done.

I am absolutely clear that hope is not enough. And it is not going to be easy
to pass health care. If it was, it would have already gotten done. It's not
going to be easy to have a sensible energy policy in this country. ExxonMobil
made $11 billion last quarter. They are not going to give up those profits
easily.

But what I also believe is that the only way we are going to actually get this
stuff done is, number one, we're going to have to mobilize and inspire the
American people so that they're paying attention to what their government is
doing. And that's what I've been doing in this campaign, and that's what I
will do as president.

And there's nothing romantic or silly about that. If the American people are
activated, that's how change is going to happen.

The second thing we've going to have to do is we're actually going to have to
go after the special interests.

Senator Clinton in one of these speeches -- it may have been the same speech
where you showed the clip -- said you can't just wave a magic wand and expect
special interests to go away. That is absolutely true, but it doesn't help if
you're taking millions of dollars in contributions from those special
interests. They are less likely to go away.

So it is important for us to crack down on how these special interests are
able to influence Congress. And yes, it is important for us to inspire and
mobilize and motivate the American people to get involved and pay attention.


 Tim, I am not yet the nominee. Now, what I've said is, is that when I am the nominee, if I am the nominee -- because we've still got a bunch of contests left and Senator Clinton's a pretty tough opponent. If I am the nominee, then I will sit down with John McCain and make sure that we have a system that is fair for both sides, because Tim, as you know, there are all sorts of ways of getting around these loopholes. 

Senator McCain is trying to explain some of the things that he has done so far
where he accepted public financing money, but people aren't exactly clear
whether all the T's were crossed and the I's were dotted.

Now what I want to point out, though, more broadly is how we have approached
this campaign. I said very early on I would not take PAC money. I would not
take money from federal-registered lobbyists. That -- that was a multimillion-
dollar decision but it was the right thing to do and the reason we were able
to do that was because I had confidence that the American people, if they were
motivated, would in fact finance the campaign.

We have now raised 90 percent of our donations from small donors, $25, $50. We
average -- our average donation is $109 so we have built the kind of
organization that is funded by the American people that is exactly the goal
and the aim of everybody who's interested in good government and politics
supports.


 What I -- what I have said is, at the point where I'm the nominee, at the point where it's appropriate, I will sit down with John McCain and make sure that we have a system that works for everybody. 


 You know, I have been very clear in my denunciation of Minister Farrakhan's anti-Semitic comments. I think that they are unacceptable and reprehensible. I did not solicit this support. He expressed pride in an African-American who seems to be bringing the country together. I obviously can't censor him, but it is not support that I sought. And we're not doing anything, I assure you, formally or informally with Minister Farrakhan. 


 Well, Tim, you know, I can't say to somebody that he can't say that he thinks I'm a good guy. (Laughter.) You know, I -- you know, I -- I have been very clear in my denunciations of him and his past statements, and I think that indicates to the American people what my stance is on those comments. 


 Tim, I think -- I am very familiar with his record, as are the American people. That's why I have consistently denounced it. 

This is not something new. This is something that -- I live in Chicago. He
lives in Chicago. I've been very clear, in terms of me believing that what he
has said is reprehensible and inappropriate. And I have consistently distanced
myself from him.


 Tim, I have some of the strongest support from the Jewish community in my hometown of Chicago and in this presidential campaign. And the reason is because I have been a stalwart friend of Israel's. I think they are one of our most important allies in the region, and I think that their security is sacrosanct, and that the United States is in a special relationship with them, as is true with my relationship with the Jewish community. 

And the reason that I have such strong support is because they know that not
only would I not tolerate anti-Semitism in any form, but also because of the
fact that what I want to do is rebuild what I consider to be a historic
relationship between the African-American community and the Jewish community.

You know, I would not be sitting here were it not for a whole host of Jewish
Americans, who supported the civil rights movement and helped to ensure that
justice was served in the South. And that coalition has frayed over time
around a whole host of issues, and part of my task in this process is making
sure that those lines of communication and understanding are reopened.

But, you know, the reason that I have such strong support in the Jewish
community and have historically -- it was true in my U.S. Senate campaign and
it's true in this presidency -- is because the people who know me best know
that I consistently have not only befriended the Jewish community, not only
have I been strong on Israel, but, more importantly, I've been willing to
speak out even when it is not comfortable.

When I was -- just last point I would make -- when I was giving -- had the
honor of giving a sermon at Ebenezer Baptist Church in conjunction with Martin
Luther King's birthday in front of a large African-American audience, I
specifically spoke out against anti- Semitism within the African-American
community. And that's what gives people confidence that I will continue to do
that when I'm president of the United States.


 Tim, I have to say I don't see a difference between denouncing and rejecting. There's no formal offer of help from Minister Farrakhan that would involve me rejecting it. But if the word "reject" Senator Clinton feels is stronger than the word "denounce," then I'm happy to concede the point, and I would reject and denounce. 


 Well, first of all, let's take a look at what the National Journal rated us on. 

It turned out that Senator Clinton and I had differences on two votes. The
first was on an immigration issue, where the question was whether guest
workers could come here, work for two years, go back for a year, and then come
back and work for another two years, which meant essentially that you were
going to have illegal immigrants for a year, because they wouldn't go back,
and I thought it was bad policy.

The second -- and this, I think, is telling in terms of how silly these
ratings are -- I supported an office of public integrity, an independent
office that would be able to monitor ethics investigations in the Senate,
because I thought it was important for the public to know that if there were
any ethical violations in the Senate, that they weren't being investigated by
the Senators themselves, but there was somebody independent who would do it.

This is something that I've tried to push as part of my ethics package.


 It was rejected. And according to the National Journal, that position is a liberal position. 

Now, I don't think that's a liberal position. I think there are a lot of
Republicans and a lot of Independents who would like to make sure that ethic
investigations are not conducted by the people who are potentially being
investigated. So the categories don't make sense.

And part of the reason I think a lot of people have been puzzled, why is it
that Senator Obama's campaign, the supposed liberal, is attracting more
Independent votes than any other candidate in the Democratic primary, and
Republican votes as well, and then people are scratching their head? It's
because people don't want to go back to those old categories of what's liberal
and what's conservative.

They want to see who is making sense, who's fighting for them, who's going to
go after the special interests, who is going to champion the issues of health
care and making college affordable, and making sure that we have a foreign
policy that makes sense? That's what I've been doing, and that's why, you
know, the proof is in the pudding. We've been attracting more Independent and
Republican support than anybody else, and that's why every poll shows that
right now I beat John McCain in a match-up in the general election.


 Well, I think Senator Clinton speaks accurately about him. He is somebody who was hand-picked by Putin. Putin has been very clear that he will continue to have the strongest hand in Russia in terms of running the government. And, you know, it looks -- just think back to the beginning of President Bush's administration when he said -- you know, he met with Putin, looked into his eyes and saw his soul, and figured he could do business with him. 

He then proceeded to neglect our relationship with Russia at a time when Putin
was strangling any opposition in the country when he was consolidating power,
rattling sabers against his European neighbors, as well as satellites of the
former Soviet Union. And so we did not send a signal to Mr. Putin that, in
fact, we were going to be serious about issues like human rights, issues like
international cooperation that were critical to us. That is something that we
have to change.


 Well, I think that we work with the international community that has also recognized Kosovo, and state that that's unacceptable. But, fortunately, we have a strong international structure anchored in NATO to deal with this issue. 

We don't have to work in isolation. And this is an area where I think that the
Clinton administration deserves a lot of credit, is, you know, the way in
which they put together a coalition that has functioned.


 It has not been perfect, but it saved lives. And we created a situation in which not only Kosovo, but other parts of the former Yugoslavia at least have the potential to over time build democracies and enter into the broader European community. 

But, you know, be very clear: We have recognized the country of Kosovo as an
independent, sovereign nation, as has Great Britain and many other countries
in the region. And I think that that carries with it, then, certain
obligations to ensure that they are not invaded.


 Well, you know, when I first arrived in the Senate that first year, we had a situation surrounding Terri Schiavo. And I remember how we adjourned with a unanimous agreement that eventually allowed Congress to interject itself into that decisionmaking process of the families. 

It wasn't something I was comfortable with, but it was not something that I
stood on the floor and stopped. And I think that was a mistake, and I think
the American people understood that that was a mistake. And as a
constitutional law professor, I knew better.

And so that's an example I think of where inaction...


 That's exactly right. 


 And I think that's an example of inaction, and sometimes that can be as costly as action. 

But let me say this, since we're wrapping up this debate. We have gone through
20 debates now. And, you know, there is still a lot of fight going on in this
contest, and we've got four coming up, and maybe more after that.

But the one thing I'm absolutely clear about is Senator Clinton has campaigned
magnificently. She is an outstanding public servant. And I'm very proud to
have been campaigning with her.

And part of what I think both of us are interested in, regardless of who wins
the nomination, is actually delivering for the American people.

You know, there is a vanity aspect and ambition aspect to politics. But when
you spend as much time as Senator Clinton and I have spent around the country,
and you hear heartbreaking story after heartbreaking story, and you realize
that people's expectations are so modest.

You know, they're not looking for government to solve all of their problems.
They just want a little bit of a hand-up to keep them in their homes if
they're about to be foreclosed upon, or to make sure their kids can go to
college to live out the American dream.

You know, it is absolutely critical that we change how business is done in
Washington and we remind ourselves of what government is supposed to be about.

And, you know, I have a lot of confidence that whoever ends up being the
nominee that the Democratic standard-bearer will try to restore that sense of
public service to our government. That's why I think we're both running, and
I'm very pleased that I've had this opportunity to run with Senator Clinton.


 I have to say, Brian, I think she is -- she would be worthy as a nominee. Now, I think I'd be better. Otherwise, I wouldn't be running. But there's no doubt that Senator Clinton is qualified and capable and would be a much better president than John McCain, who I respect and I honor his service to this country, but essentially has tethered himself to the failed policies of George Bush over the last seven years. 

On economics, he wants to continue tax cuts to the wealthy that we can't
afford, and on foreign policy he wants to continue a war that not only can we
not afford in terms of money, but we can't afford in terms of lives and is not
making us more safe. We can't afford it in terms of strategy.

So I don't think that Senator Clinton has to answer a question as to whether
she's capable of being president or our standard bearer.

I will say this, that the reason I think I'm better as the nominee is that I
can bring this country together I think in a unique way, across divisions of
race, religion, region. And that is what's going to be required in order for
us to actually deliver on the issues that both Senator Clinton and I care so
much about.

And I also think I have a track record, starting from the days I moved to
Chicago as a community organizer, when I was in my 20s, on through my work in
state government, on through my work as a United States senator, I think I
bring a unique bias in favor of opening up government, pushing back special
interests, making government more accountable so that the American people can
have confidence that their voice is being heard.

Those are things -- those are qualities that I bring to this race, and I hope
that the people of Ohio, Texas, Rhode Island and Vermont decide that those are
qualities that they need in the next president of the United States.


